
                                This narration is to bring perspective to survival and rescue efforts at elevations near 20,000 Feet Above Mean Sea Level (AMSL) after Wednesday's avalanche in which the precious lives of ten soldiers was lost.
In June 89, when servicing the same post, I survived an engine failure after taking off in a Cheetah helicopter. I happened to be the co-pilot in that sortie, and we also had one Army havildar as our passenger who was being flown back from the post. In that treacherous terrain, there is not even a small flat patch on which to land the crippled helicopter down; we had to turn back and make a forced landing uphill, as is advisable in such situations.
In aviation terms, our actions from the moment of engine malfunction to the forced landing were exemplary. On touch down, the aircraft rolled over and crashed in the snow. All occupants were unhurt. The troops at the post witnessed the entire sequence. By the time we managed to come out of the machine, a rescue team was approaching the helicopter about 400 meters below the post. Another helicopter of the formation, which was behind us on approach, also witnessed the entire occurrence.
We were amazed to notice that the rescue party had brought along oxygen bottles, stretchers and medical aid with them. But we were nervous about getting off the helicopters and walking over the area which was known to be crevasse-infested and covered by fresh snow. Together with the rescue team, we followed the track to the post that was made when the team rushed to help us. After every 10 steps, on indication from the rescue party leader, all of us halted to catch our breath. At that height, it was indeed an effort to reach the post. From above the station, the company commander was overseeing our progress and blowing a whistle to make us halt periodically. At that elevation, the waist-deep snow was soft like loose sand. Once at the post, we were flown back by other helicopters, one by one.
In the present situation, when the post was hit by this week's avalanche, rescue teams were flown in from nearby posts  because they are fully acclimatised for elevations above 15,000 feet. At such altitudes, only one passenger can be shuttled at a time in a Cheetah helicopter, which can take a maximum load of 75-125 kg. So the induction process - bringing in the rescue team - takes a long time. In this case, more than 20 troops were inducted without wasting any time. A large quantity of rescue equipment was also flown in. One needs to appreciate that basic necessities like food, water, shelter and communication equipment etc. for the rescue team also have to be taken along. The rescue teams have hard labour to undertake during Search and Rescue that puts them at further risk of suffering High Altitude Pulmonary Oedema (HAPO) amongst other hazards.
A rescue effort under these circumstances is nothing short of a heroic feat. We should also understand the emotional stress for the rescue team which belongs to the same regiment as those who are missing - usually the rescuers and those missing are also from the  same regions of the country. There is always a possibility of family members being on both teams. Also, at this time, the requirements of the post ahead have to be met since they were supported by the post now buried the avalanche. The security of the forward-most post is always a serious operational concern that weighs heavily on the Battalion Commander and staff chain right up to the Headquarters. An avalanche of such a huge magnitude has far-reaching consequences apart from the tragic loss of life.
My heart reaches out to be the fellow soldiers and families of the soldiers who have perished in this disaster.
On behalf of all Uniformed Services and my countrymen, I salute the brave men of Indian Army who stand guard to the frontiers at such difficult places, facing enormous challenges day in and out, upholding the territorial integrity of our great Nation.
Jai Hind!(Group Captain Sundeep Mehta, a helicopter pilot in the IAF, is currently a spokesperson with the Defence Ministry. He has flown extensively in the Siachen Glacier region in 1989-90.)Disclaimer: The opinions expressed within this article are the personal opinions of the author. The facts and opinions appearing in the article do not reflect the views of NDTV and NDTV does not assume any responsibility or liability for the same.

