Aligarh is not only a unique film for the Indian audience, but also a remarkable landmark in my career. People have been used to watching Manoj Bajpayee in all genres, in different avatars, but somewhere, I think, they were looking for softer characters from me. Aligarh's character Professor Ramchandra Siras is that sort of role. And when a film like Aligarh creates so much curiosity even before the release just by one or two shows in Busan, London or MAMI in Mumbai, it only makes me more nervous to see the reaction of the crowd when they will actually watch it after its release on February 26.
I, as a part of the film, am very excited, curious and becoming impatient about the audience's reaction. It's a film made by Indian director Hansal Mehta, and written by Apurva Asrani. It's a film which is a brave attempt in a society which is quite homophobic.
I still recall when the announcement was made that I would play a gay professor in Aligarh -  one or two followers on Twitter reacted very sharply to it. But I was ready for it.
Ever since Hansal Mehta gave me a narration, not for a second, did I doubt my decision. The film talks about the right to privacy which is quite a concern in our society where what you do, how you walk, how you sleep, who you sleep with have been scrutinised for a long time. And in a society like this, Aligarh becomes a very important voice for the people who are fighting for the right to privacy and expression. I really thank Mukesh Chhabra - the casting director - and Hansal Mehta for making an out-of-the-box casting decision by taking me; I am very happy with myself that I have left no stone unturned to make sure that decision is proven right.
If a film entertains beyond just the word "entertainment", if it provokes you and coaxes you to have a debate within yourself or with others, then that film does more than justice to its audience and to society at large. There is a huge population of the LGBT community in our society, but we tend to have a blind eye towards their existence. By doing that, not only are we fooling ourselves, but we're also subjecting a large part of the population to sheer torture and suffering. We have to come to terms with the fact they are part of the same country, the same society that we are a part of, and they should have equal rights. And we can give it to them by decriminalising homosexuality in the first place. I'm very sure Aligarh will at least start the debate which has been dormant for a long time.
You cannot accept the whole body and leave one organ ignored. By doing that, you are harming yourself and this is what we are doing with this community when it comes to giving them respect and recognising their existence. And that is where Aligarh becomes a very important point to start the debate in the first place. Aligarh will contribute a lot more than just being a masala entertainer. And that is why it is a very important film for me and in my career. I know my daughter will be very proud of me when she grows up and watches the film.
By criminalising one's sexual preference, you're giving a free hand to the corrupt administration to charge the poor people unnecessarily, harass them unnecessarily - there are so many cases like this. That is one point which needs to be looked into. By making homosexuality a criminal act, we are somewhere becoming ruthless to one segment of the population which deserves better treatment and sensitivity from the government and the judiciary of our country. My interaction with Dr Shashi Tharoor has widened my knowledge about the problem that the LGBT community is facing. And I request all parliamentarians to be present when he reintroduces the bill in the parliament and vote in favour of Dr Shashi Tharoor's bill. I belong to no party and nor do I have any intention of joining or supporting any party. I just want a free and fair society for each and every human being where all of us can co-exist with all honesty and respect for each other.(Manoj Bajpayee is an Indian actor. He has won 2 National Film Awards and 2 Filmfare Awards.)Disclaimer: The opinions expressed within this article are the personal opinions of the author. The facts and opinions appearing in the article do not reflect the views of NDTV and NDTV does not assume any responsibility or liability for the same.

