
                                It's the season for news networks to announce and distribute awards at gala ceremonies. NDTV, for instance, recently gave away the "NDTV Indian of the Year" Awards. NDTV seemed to go out of its way to avoid politicians, the flagship "India of the Year" prize being shared by the promoters of some of India's leading technology start-ups.
The award was well-deserved and between young entrepreneurs, using their intellectual capital and venture capital funding to create value and jobs, and us often boring politicians, there's no question of who people would prefer. Yet, it was only till a couple of years ago that the "Indian of the Year" in so many such award ceremonies was inevitably a politician.
So what is happening? Is India maturing and learning to acknowledge news achievers beyond politicians? Are news channels waking up to other fields? On the other hand, can politicians and businessmen and start-up gurus, or even sportspersons and film stars, be measured using the same benchmarks? Why should they be competing for the same prize in the same category?
Since politics and politicians are such an important part of our news environment and such a presence on our news channels, I feel there is need for a separate set of political awards. Perhaps a channel - maybe even NDTV - can polish that loose idea and take it forward. My suggestions are for awards in the following categories. Feel free to add to the list.1. Big Election Winner of the Year: The individual or team or party that won an iconic election in a given year, delivering a victory that made a change in national politics. In 2011, this would have been Mamata Banerjee after she ousted the CPI(M) in West Bengal. In 2014, it would obviously have been Narendra Modi. In 2015, it would have been a close call between Arvind Kejriwal in Delhi and Nitish Kumar-Lalu Yadav in Bihar.  
In some years, the award could go to the winner of a single by-election. If such an award had been around back then, VP Singh would probably have won it after the Allahabad Lok Sabha by-election of 1988.2. Parliamentarian of the Year (Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, separate awards): The media hardly covers parliament, except when there's a disruption. Members who work hard on their speeches or make incisive interventions in debates on topics that the anchors consider "boring" find it disheartening that there is nobody to report on their efforts, no live telecast.
Such MPs, and there are many among my colleagues in parliament, need to be publicly honoured for a year of consistent, serious performance. Such rigour is the lifeblood of our parliamentary system.3. First-time Parliamentarian of the Year (Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, separate awards): Similar to the previous category, but awarded only to MPs in their first term. This is a critical, formative period for young MPs. It determines how their political evolution takes place, and it is important to attempt to influence that journey by acknowledging early talent.4. Party Publication of the Year: This is a tricky one because there are so many parties in India, and so many languages. So how does one choose? I would suggest stick to official publications of parties represented in Parliament, then do an assessment - with good translators facilitating that process - of the quality of their publications, editorial timbre, acumen of messaging and communication. This will encourage parties and politicians to take the written word - whether in print or a digital platform - seriously, and remember commitments made in writing.5. Best Political Social Media Presence (Twitter Handle/Facebook page/Other): This could be awarded to an individual politician or a party that makes most effective and innovative use of social media for political outreach.6. Party Spokesperson of the Year: The best, most effective and unflappable spokesperson for a political party on television and in press conferences, media interviews and perhaps at other public events. It is important to consider a political spokesperson's work across all these platforms before giving him or her the prize, and not restricting it to prime-time television (though that will doubtless be a critical parameter).7. Best Article Published by an MP in a Mainstream Publication or Website: Again, this will require inviting nominations from various states and languages, and not restricting the exercise to just English and three or four newspapers published in Delhi. Writing an 800-word online article is not vanity, it helps you think through an idea and logically formulate your argument on a policy or issue. This is required in any profession, not just public life.8. Private Member's Bill of the Year: The Private Member's Bill is rarely used in our parliamentary system, where legislation is generally moved by the government and by political parties. The idea of an individual MP introducing legislation that is thought-provoking, sometimes contrarian to conventional thinking, is a brave one. Not too many MPs attempt this, but those who do should be commended. The Private Member's Bill that most enriches our public discourse, or seeks to expand the cause of democracy and civic freedoms, deserves applause.9. MP with the Best Grasp of International Affairs: Politicians tend to obsess with local and provincial issues. But MPs also engage with the wider world, and come into contact even more strongly when they move to parliamentary committees, delegations to the United Nations or into ministerial office. How does an MP prepare himself or herself for this role? How much do MPs in our country, now so integrated with the rest of the world, equip themselves for this? Some recognition is required.10. MP with the Most Innovative use of MPLADs funds: MPs support a variety of projects with their MPLADS funds. Which project is the most innovative and impact making for constituents and for ordinary people? Which MP has thought differently from run-of-the-mill ideas? Let MPs learn to challenge themselves and come up with out-of-the-box ideas.
Parties and MPs should nominate candidates for these categories. Even self-nomination should be permitted. The news network that takes up this proposal should put together a panel of seven or eight judges from a variety of backgrounds and with impeccable credentials.
A prize of Rs. 1 lakh should be awarded for each category. The money should not go to the winning MP, but to a charity or a cause of his choice.Derek O'Brien is leader, Parliamentary party Trinamool Congress (RS), and Chief National spokesperson of the party.Disclaimer: The opinions expressed within this article are the personal opinions of the author. The facts and opinions appearing in the article do not reflect the views of NDTV and NDTV does not assume any responsibility or liability for the same.

