Panipat:                             
	Haryana has the distinction of having the worst sex ratio in the country with 837 females per 1000 males. Now a survey conducted by an NGO identifies gender bias at the hands of parents as the root cause of the problem.
	Breakthrough, an NGO that works to curb violence and discrimination against women, says that 90 per cent parents in Haryana give preference to their sons over daughters.
	The survey was conducted in schools and colleges in four districts in the state - Panipat, Jhajjar, Sonipat and Rohtak - as part of the NGO's 'Mission Hazar' of 'Mission 1000'. The initiative aims to generate awareness about the gender bias prevalent in the state and improve the sex ratio."A DJ is hired and sweets are distributed in the locality on birth of a boy. This is not done when a girl is born," says Sonal, a ninth standard student in one of the schools where the survey was conducted.
	The survey also reveals that 89 per cent of women are home makers or help out with farming and only 11 per cent work in the organised sector.
	Sanjay Singh, one of the lead surveyors of the initiative, hopes that the awareness will help in changing the mindset of the people.
	"It's worrying that the bias is so entrenched, but our hope is that by working with young people we can also try and positively change the mindset of families," he said.
	Among the people surveyed, 66 per cent say women are not seen outside their homes after sunset.
	Sonali Khan, director of the NGO says that participation of women is very less across sectors.
	"It's a perspective of young people that girls are missing from the community, especially in schools," she said, adding that it's a major concern for the state.
	Governments both at the Centre and state are trying to attend to the skewed gender ratio.
	Addressing the problem, Prime Minister Narendra Modi in January had launched the 'Beti Bachao, Beti Parhao' programme from Panipat. The Haryana government is also considering making it mandatory for couples to register all pregnancies in the state to curb illegal abortions based on sex determination.
	                 

