Patna:                             Hitting back at the BJP for its criticism of his government, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar today said the way Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) Students' Union President Kanhaiya Kumar was "beaten up" in the presence of police shows there is "jungle raj" in Delhi.
Referring to a sting video broadcast yesterday by a news channel, he said it shows "lawyers used abusive language and illegally beat up Kanhaiya Kumar in the presence of police". "There is no rule of law in Delhi. Delhi Police comes under central government's jurisdiction. Whatever happened in Delhi shows that there is jungle raj in Delhi," he claimed.
Mr Kumar condemned the assault on the JNU student leader in the Patiala House Court in Delhi and attacked the BJP for highlighting even "small incidents" in Bihar.
"They (BJP leaders) speak on even small incidents in the state. But what happened during the production of Kanhaiya Kumar in the court? This shows there is 'jungle raj' in Delhi," he said.
Mr Kumar said though he doesn't support anti-national slogans but "they (authorities concerned) have not produced any proof against Kanhaiya so far".
Noting that the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and the BJP want to bring "fascism" in the country by "thrusting" their ideology, he said all secular forces should unite to take it on.
"If raising slogans against hunger, capitalism, feudalism, the RSS, and the BJP are considered as sedition then it is surely a conspiracy to thrust their ideology," Mr Kumar said.
He alleged the RSS and the BJP want to "deflect" people's attention from "financial failures" of the government through their "agenda" of proving people anti-national.
They promised to create employment opportunities and bringing black money but they failed to live up to the expectations of the people, Mr Kumar said.
"Growth rate is not picking up, investments are not coming in for the 'Make In India', and the conditions of banks are very poor. Financial failure is looming large on their face hence they are trying to divide the country by raking up emotive issues," he said.(This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)

