New Delhi: HighlightsViolence at Patiala Court for second time before Kanhaiya Kumar's hearing
Lawyer Vikram Chauhan leads charge, shouts 'Bharat Maata Ki Jai' slogans
Police have summoned him, two others for attacking the JNU student leader
                                For the second time in two days, violence erupted at a Delhi court and a face common to both incidents is that of Vikram Chauhan, the lawyer who has posted photographs with BJP leaders on Facebook.
Mr Chauhan led the large group of lawyers who barged into the court complex today carrying flags and shouting slogans of "Bharat Maata Ki Jai" and "Vande Mataram Bolna Hoga (Have to say Vande Mataram)".
Confronted by reporters, Mr Chauhan said: "People who said 'Pakistan Zindabad' have been made heroes and we are being called gundas."
He alleged that a rival group of lawyers was trying to attack him. "They are trying to beat us up and we don't even respond?" he questioned.
The police, accused of not acting against him, have summoned him and two other lawyers.
On Monday, Mr Chauhan featured prominently in an assault on JNU faculty, students and journalists waiting for a hearing on arrested student Kanhaiya Kumar.
He was seen holding and beating a person and heard shouting "anti-nationals go to Pakistan" and "Bharat Mata ki Jai".  He also threatened NDTV's Sonal Mehrotra, demanding that she hand over her mobile phone, with which she had filmed some of the violence.
Speaking to NDTV, Mr Chauhan said he did organize a protest against "anti-nationals" but it got out of hand as lawyers were provoked by JNU teachers.
Despite all the visual evidence, no action was taken against him in the last two days.
Today, he was back at the court, taking the lead in slogan-shouting.
He has denied any political affiliation though he has bene photographed with top BJP leaders including Home Minister Rajnath Singh and veteran LK Advani.
He regularly sends out invitations on WhatsApp to BJP events and urges people to be on time before a leader is to arrive. He reportedly sent such messages on Monday and today too.                

