Pampore: HighlightsJ&K:2 Army captains among 5 security personnel killed fighting terrorists
Pampore encounter began Saturday afternoon, one civilian also killed
3-5 terrorists believed to be hiding inside 5-storey govt building
                                After three days of intense gunbattle, at least three terrorists are still holed up in a government campus in Pampore on the outskirts of Srinagar, the capital of Jammu and Kashmir. Two Army Captains and a jawan, two para-military personnel and a civilian have been killed.
The three Army para-commandos, Captain Tushar Mahajan, Captain Pawan Kumar and Lance Naik Om Prakash, were killed while trying to enter the Entrepreneurship Development Institute or EDI campus to flush out the terrorists.
There is no clear information yet if any terrorist was injured or killed in the encounter. Police sources said the terrorists - believed to be from the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba - have now been cornered in a portion of one of the buildings and it's a matter of time before they are neutralized.
The Army said on Monday morning that all civilians have been evacuated and two buildings have been secured. "The terrorists have taken position in the main building," said Lt Gen Satish Dua, General Officer Commanding 15 Corps. "It is a huge campus, it has three buildings. Each of the floors has to be cleared, room by room.  Specialized units are required for it, we are in complete synergy with the CRPF," he said.
 
 Army pays homage to soldiers who died fighting terrorists during an encounter in Pampore.
On Saturday, the terrorists ambushed a Central Reserve Police Force or CRPF convoy killing two jawans, and then forced their way into the EDI campus. More than 100 trapped civilians were evacuated, but an employee of the institute Abdul Gani Mir was killed in crossfire.
The terrorists, who officials said were well-armed, have used the campus as a concrete bunker to prolong the stand-off. Officers said intervention in such operations is extremely difficult. The Army has used heavy arms in the operation and loud explosions and heavy firing has been being heard since Saturday evening.
 
Yesterday, the last floor and rooftop of one of the buildings caught fire.
This is the first major terror attack near Srinagar in the last six years when terrorists have captured a building and engaged security forces for such a long time.                

