New Delhi: Highlights'Govt trying to muzzle dissent' Rahul Gandhi tells protesting students 
Arvind Kejriwal tweets support for student protest march to Jantar Mantar
Protesters demand 'Rohith Act' against caste discrimination in education
                                Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, who joined students' protests at Jantar Mantar on Tuesday afternoon over Hyderabad Central University Rohith Vemula's suicide last month and the ongoing JNU crisis said, "This government seems to be at war with the students of this country.
"They have the right to speak...We have the right to raise our voice against anything which is wrong," Mr Kejriwal said, hitting out at the government for taking action against students for expressing dissent.
"Modiji students se pange mat lena (Don't take on students)," the Delhi chief minister announced from the stage. "If students get together, they will shake up your (Prime Minister's) chair in such a manner that you will not forget."
The AAP leader charged Central ministers with driving "Rohith Vemula to suicide." Earlier Congress president Rahul Gandhi had come out in support of the students who took out a march in Delhi to demand justice for Mr Vemula and JNU Students' Union President Kanhaiya Kumar, arrested on charges of sedition.
Mr Vemula's family is also present at the "Chalo Dilli" protest.
 
Arvind Kejriwal spoke to Rohith Vemula's mother. (PTI photo)
Carrying the tricolor, blue and red flags, students, activists and intellectuals marched for about a kilometre to Jantar Mantar, the popular site of protests in the heart of the capital. Students of the JNU or Jawaharlal Nehru University, who are demanding the release of Kanhaiya Kumar, have also joined in.
Mr Kejriwal had earlier tweeted that he would go to Jantar Mantar to express solidarity with Rohith's family and to speak to the students.
As the march began, protesters carried placards and shouted slogans demanding a "Rohith Act" to end caste discrimination in education.
"We have never seen such an anti-student government. The future of educational institutions is at stake," said an activist.
 
Protesters carried placards and shouted slogans demanding a "Rohith Act" to end caste discrimination in education.
"This protest is for millions of Rohith Vemula's, Dalits, minorities and women who have been denied freedom of speech, expression and basic education," she added.
The protesters also demanded action against union ministers Smriti Irani and Bandaru Dattatreya, who have been accused by Rohith's supporters of forcing the Hyderabad Central University to punish him for allegedly attacking a rival student activist. Rohith, 26, was found hanging on January 17, days after he was banned from the hostel and other areas on campus.                

