New Delhi:                             Walking erect at the age of 83, Rajendra Singh looked relieved after meeting his nephew -- JNU Student's Union president Kanhaiya Kumar, who is in Delhi's Tihar jail on charges of sedition.
 
"What pains me is the label of 'anti-national' is being used for a family that has a martyred son," said Mr Singh. Kanhaiya's cousin, a CRPF jawan, had sacrificed his life fighting terrorists, he said.
"Even now, five members of the family are in security forces," said Mr Singh, who was at Ajoy Bhavan, headquarters of the Communist Party of India. Mr Singh, who came from Bihar to attend Kanhaiya's bail hearing at the Delhi High Court on Tuesday, is staying there. Kanhaiya's 65-year-old father has been bedridden for several years due to paralysis.
Kanhaiya Kumar was arrested on February 12, after a programme supporting executed Parliament attack convict Afzal Guru was held in the campus, during which anti-India slogans were raised.
Mr Singh is accompanied by his 37-year-old nephew Manikant, Kanhaiya's elder brother, who works at a private firm in Bongaigaon, the oil township of Assam.
"We are relieved to see that the security arrangements at Tihar are quite good. We were apprehensive about Kanhaiya's personal security after the attack at the Patiala House courts," Manikant told NDTV referring to last week's attack on his brother by a group of lawyers inside the premises of Delhi's Patiala House courts.  
"Kanhaiya told us that Delhi Police personnel acted very swiftly inside Patiala House attack and protected him," he added.
Asked what he discussed with his brother, Manikant said, "I had conveyed our mother's message to him that he should move ahead with conviction and all of us are behind him".
Kanhaiya, who has been kept in a separate cell for security reasons, was busy reading Munsi Premchand, he said. He also added that the student leader was doing some writing.
"We are hopeful that we will get justice," said Mr Singh.                

