New Delhi:                             Bowing to strong protests by the Opposition, Union Minister Rajiv Pratap Rudy today expressed regrets for not informing the local lawmaker while visiting a skill development institute in Kerala.
During Question Hour, Revolutionary Socialist Party (RSP) member NK Premachandran said in Lok Sabha that Mr Rudy had visited the institute in his constituency Kollam but no information was given to him as the local lawmaker. Mr Premachandran said it was not a healthy practice and ministers visiting any place must inform the local lawmaker so that he was aware of the minister's programme.
The RSP lawmaker was vociferously supported by several Left and Congress members who sought Speaker Sumitra Mahajan's intervention, forcing Rudy to express his regrets.
"I am sorry. But I had visited the skill development academy just for five minute. In fact the decision was taken suddenly at the instance of a Kerala Minister when I was passing by the area," he said.
Mr Rudy said it is an excellent institute and expressed appreciation for the Kerala government for its good maintenance.
Replying a question, the minister said there are over 40 skill development schemes across sectors being implemented by over 18 central ministries and departments to promote skills of people, including the youth, in the country.
"Funds under these schemes are provided by the concerned Ministries and Departments to the implementing agencies, including states in accordance with the guidelines issued for the schemes," he said.
Mr Rudy said government has launched the flagship scheme 'Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana on July 15, 2015 to enable and mobilise a large number of youth to take up outcome based skill training and earn livelihood.
The scheme has the target to benefit 24 lakh people with training of 14 lakh fresh entrants and certification of 10 lakh persons under Recognition of Prior Learning.
"As on February 22, 2016, 12.50 lakh candidates have enrolled in 9,314 training centres spread across the country with coverage of 29 states and 6 Union Territories," the minister said.(This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)

