Chandigarh: HighlightsAll suspended officers from Rohtak, one of the areas worst hit by riots 
Haryana Police accused of not maintaining law and order during protests
28 dead, over 200 injured in the 9 day long agitation by Jat protesters
                                Initiating action against police officers following the recent violent Jat agitation, the Haryana government on Thursday ordered the suspenion an inspector general of police (IGP) and two deputy superintendents of police (DSPs).
Those suspended include IGP Shrikant Jadhav, who was the Rohtak range IG till last week when the agitation took a violent turn.
Jadhav was, on Sunday, shunted out at Rohtak Range IG and posted as IG, State Crime Record Bureau, Madhuban, an inconsequential posting.
The two DSPs suspended are Amit Dahiya and Amit Bhatia, both posted in Rohtak town.The Haryana Police is being accused of not reacting to the situation and ensuring safety of people and property as the violent protestors had a field day in arson and looting.
Rohtak, Sonipat, Panipat and Jhajjar, the districts worst-hit by violence in the ongoing Jat agitation, fall under the Rohtak range.
Other affected districts included Bhiwani, Hisar and Kaithal.
Rohtak town, 75 km from Delhi, suffered the brunt of the mindless violence by the Jat protestors with scores of buildings, shops, malls, private hospitals, educational institutions and vehicles being set on fire and extensively damaged.
As many as 28 people were killed and over 200 injured in the nine-day long agitation which saw highways, roads and railway tracks being blocked. Authorities had to requisition the army and paramilitary forces to control the situation.
The Haryana Police had on Wednesday registered a case sedition and criminal conspiracy against Virender Singh, a close aide of former chief minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda, for trying to fan violence during the Jat agitation.
A Khap leader, Man Singh Dalal, was also named in the first information report registered at the Civil Lines police station in Rohtak.
Both were booked for sedition, trying to incite violence and criminal conspiracy.
 (This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)

