New Delhi/Hyderabad: HighlightsSmriti Irani's claim that Rohith Vemula could have been saved challenged
He was already dead for 2 hours when I came: Doctor who declared him dead
Video contradicts Irani's claim that police was not allowed near his body
                                Union Education Minister Smriti Irani's assertions on Hyderabad student Rohith Vemula during her fiery speech in Parliament on Wednesday have been challenged by the doctor who examined him.
Ms Irani said there was evidence to suggest that there was a chance Rohith Vemula, the research scholar found hanging at the Hyderabad Central University on January 17, could have been revived.
"This is how politics was played on this child and his dead body. Nobody allowed a doctor near him. The police has reported... Not one attempt was made to revive this child. Not one attempt was made to take him to a doctor. Instead his body was used as a political tool. Hidden. No police was allowed till 6.30 the next morning. Not me, but the Telangana police is saying this," the minister said to cries of "shame" from the government benches.
The doctor who declared Rohith dead has disputed the minister's comments.
Dr Rajasree Malpath, Chief Medical Officer at the Hyderabad Central University, says she was called in moments after Rohith was found hanging from a fan. She told NDTV that when she came to examine Rohith, he had been dead for two hours.
"Around 7.30 pm I got a call from the hostel. I reached within 4 minutes. The body was cold, stiff and rigid. His tongue was protruding and rigor mortis had set in," the doctor told NDTV.
A video of the room where Rohith's body was kept that day, shared by his friends, shows policemen next to the body, which contradicts the minister's claim that the police were not allowed near the body till the next morning.
Rohith Vemula's suicide has triggered an acrimonious political debate around alleged caste discrimination in universities.
The student was found dead days after he was banned from the hostel and other common areas on campus for allegedly attacking an activist of the BJP-linked ABVP. His supporters and opposition parties allege that Rohith, a Dalit, was a victim of ostracism.
Ms Irani was yesterday responding to opposition allegations that she had forced the university to punish Rohith with multiple letters.                

