New Delhi:                             BJP today alleged that Congress had a role in the extensive violence in Haryana during the Jat quota agitation for quota and asked party vice president Rahul Gandhi to stop his "divisive politics".
The party referred to an audio tape, which has a close aide of former chief minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda allegedly inciting more violence, as it trained its guns on Congress.
"It is clear from them (tapes) that there was a big conspiracy against the Haryana government. The way destruction was done, people were harassed and looting was done, it is very unfortunates.
"We will expect Rahul Gandhi to not indulge in divisive politics in the country. If you have so much lust for power, then go to the people with your account. If Congress conspires against us, then we are in the court of people and they will do justice," BJP national secretary Shrikant Sharma told a press conference.
On allegations that Haryana government failed to handle the crisis, he said it was aware of its duties and doing its work.
To a question about massive arson targeting properties, he said law will take its own course.
Congress last night sought explanation from PCC delegate Virender over the audio clip in which he is accused of talking to a Khap leader in order to allegedly incite violence amid the ongoing Jat agitation.
Mr Virender, a close aide of Mr Hooda, said the voice in the clip was his, "but the conversation has been doctored".
Interacting with the media in Kaithal, Haryana BJP chief Subhash Barala said that the state government would examine the role of officers and employees during the agitation and take stern action against those found guilty.
Minister for state Nayab Saini, Guhla legislator Kulwant Bazigar, district BJP president Subhash Hajwana and other senior party office bearers were also present on the occasion.
Mr Barala informed that the state government had announced that it will give Rs. 10 lakh as compensation and a government job to a family member of the "innocent persons" who were killed during the Jat reservation agitation.                

