Mumbai:                             With the promise of an investment of Rs. 15 lakh crore, Prime Minister Narendra Modi's push for growth with the biggest showcase of India's manufacturing prowess, the Make In India week came to an end on Thursday.
With 102 countries, 9000 Indian companies, 2000 foreign companies and 150 events, the Make In India week became Asia's largest multi-sectoral exhibition.
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion Secretary Amitabh Kant told NDTV, "We have made India the most open economy. Our FDI has grown by 48% in the last 18 months while world over it has fallen."Spread over 2.3 lakh square kilometres with 27 convention halls, the Make In India centre is not just grand in terms of scale and size but also in terms of footfall and the amount of investment it has brought in. Eight lakh ninety thousand visitors dropped in with 1245 speakers at the various seminars that were held. The expansive Make in India centre rolled out the red carpet for investors.
"I don't think most of imagined that this is possible. Our vendors from Sweden and Japan were swept off their feet," saud Managing Director of Asian Paints Jalaj Dani.
The event also saw the participation of 17 states and eight Chief Ministers. And Maharashtra led the pack with over 2500 MoUs and investment worth 8 lakh crore with the promise of 30 lakh new jobs. Investments for regions like Marathwada and Vidarbha, which have been plagued by farmers' suicides was also announced.
Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis said, "It has been the biggest show of cooperative competitive and collaborative federalism."
With the Make in India week now over the message from Industry to the government and opposition is clear. An aggressive opposition has meant the government has had to delay key reforms like the GST (Goods and Services Tax) along with issues with retrospective taxation, calls for criminal cases against bank defaulters the government has a lot on its plate. The industry wants quick movement on this issue.
"Opposition should play a constructive role in the development of India. We see so much disruption that happens in Parliament. Which developing economy does not have issues. Our issues in India are the least," Chairman and Managing Director of the Raymond Group, Gautam Singhania said.
The government says it will deliver and the investment on the ground will match the announcements.                

