New Delhi:                             India today said it was awaiting a visit by Pakistan's Special Investigation Team and other details in connection with the Pathankot terror attack, days after Pakistani authorities registered an FIR in the case.
"The government awaits details from Pakistan and also awaits visit by Pakistan's SIT," Minister of State for External Affairs VK Singh, replying to a question in the Lok Sabha said.Pakistan Prime Minister's Foreign Affairs Advisor Sartaj Aziz on Monday had said that the SIT from Pakistan may visit Pathankot in the first few days of March and that his country was pursuing the investigation seriously.
In first official confirmation, he had also said Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar, named by India as the mastermind of the Pathankot attack, has been under "protective custody" since January 14.
Mr Singh said Security Advisors and Foreign Secretaries of the two countries are in regular touch and that Pakistan conveyed to India that leads provided to it about the attack are being investigated.
"The government of India is committed to addressing all outstanding issues with Pakistan through bilateral peaceful dialogue, as envisaged in the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration," he said.
He said after the Pathankot attack, it was conveyed to Pakistan that it must take firm and immediate action against the organisations and individuals in Pakistan responsible for and linked to the attack.
"This was done at the highest level when Prime Minister received a call from Prime Minister of Pakistan Nawaz Sharif on January 5," he said.
Pakistani authorities had lodged an FIR in connection with the Pathankot attack on February 18, without naming Masood Azhar.
Referring to a press release issued by Pakistan on January 13, he said it mentioned about apprehending several individuals belonging to Jaish-e-Mohammad and sealing of the outfit's offices.
Replying to a separate question on attack on Indian Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif in Afghanistan last month, Singh said government was awaiting detailed information from Afghan authorities regarding "result" of their investigation into the attack.
He said in view of the attack, government has undertaken further review of security measures in the Embassy and four consulates in coordination with Afghan authorities.
                 

