Sangrur:                             Kick-starting his five-day visit to Punjab, AAP leader Arvind Kejriwal today lashed out at his political opponents, saying other parties make their manifestos sitting in air conditioned rooms while his party cadre would visit villages and homes to understand their problems.
The Delhi Chief Minister, who began the tour with a visit to Sangrur, said he would visit families of farmers who committed suicide and those affected by the drug problem.
"I am starting my five-day trip of Punjab today. I will be visiting villages and meeting with common people," Mr Kejriwal said."I will be meeting families affected by the drug problem. AAP will try to understand their problems. We will meet families of farmers who committed suicide and understand their problems too. The AAP philosophy is that we meet people, listen to their problems and find solutions," he said.
Hitting out at his political opponents, he said other parties make their manifestos in air-conditioned rooms but "We will go to villages and homes of people".
Mr Kejriwal along other party leaders including Punjab's AAP convenor Sucha Singh Chhotepur, Bhagwant Mann, MP, Sanjay Singh, Sukhpal Singh Khaira from Punjab, left for Sangrur to meet the next of kin of brick kiln worker Satguru, who had committed suicide along with his wife Rani recently as he was under a debt of Rs. 70,000.
The Chief Minister is also slated to visit Bathinda district, an AAP spokesman said.
      
Posters, meanwhile, appeared in Bathinda questioning the performance of Mr Kejriwal.
AAP had successfully organised a mega rally in Muktsar last month. The party hopes to sweep the state polls next year and is locked in a tussle with  Congress and the ruling SAD-BJP combine.
In October last, Mr Kejriwal had visited Punjab, which was hit by protests due to desecration of Guru Granth Sahib. The party has been raising its voice against the issue of drug addiction and farmers suicide and alleged irregularities in buying pesticides.
AAP had opened its account in Lok Sabha by winning four seats in Punjab in 2014 general elections. However, two of its lawmakers - Dharamvira Gandhi and Harinder Singh Khalsa - have been suspended on the charge of anti-party activities.
 
Mr Kejriwal is also slated to meet the business community, to understand the problems faced by them in the state, a AAP spokesman said.                

