Rohtak/Chandigarh:                             Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar made it clear today that the Jat community will be given reservation in the state under a special provision and the OBC or Other Backward Classes quota would not be disturbed.
Mr Khattar, who arrived in Rohtak for the first time after widespread violence during the nine-day-long Jat agitation virtually devastated many parts of the town, said that "the state government would not spare those found guilty of indulging in violent activities but no false case would be registered against anyone".
"A high level probe would be conducted into the entire incident and strict action would be taken against all officers and employees of police and administration involved in this incident," he told media after his short trip to Rohtak where he had to face angry traders and residents and was forced to retreat and leave for Delhi."The state government would not disturb the quota of 27 per cent reservation meant for the Other Backward Classes (OBC). The government would make a separate provision for their (Jats) reservation," said a stern-looking Mr Khattar, whose government has drawn flak for not being able to contain the agitation and the violence.
Communities under the OBC category in Haryana are opposing inclusion of Jats in the same category.
Mr Khattar asserted that a "thorough investigation of the entire chain of events would be conducted and conspirators would be exposed".
Referring to the audio clip which has surfaced, in which the close aide of a senior Congress leader was allegedly trying to incite violence, he said that the clip would be "thoroughly investigated".
"If the involvement of any person belonging to any political party or organization is found, he would not be spared. People who have damaged property during the agitation would be identified and strict action would be taken against them," the Chief Minister warned.
He said that the state government would provide full compensation for the damage caused to property during the recent agitation in the state. The state government would estimate losses suffered by the people after gathering full information.
Mr Khattar said that strict action would be taken against the officers and employees found negligent and a committee of retired officers would be constituted to investigate their conduct.
"Action would be taken against them on the basis of the report of the committee," he added.
The Chief Minister said that 'dharnas' at all places across the state have been lifted and blockades on all roads cleared.
At least 19 people were killed and nearly 200 injured in the violence during the nine-day long Jat agitation for reservation.                

