Srinagar:                             The Army today said infiltration from across the Line of Control (LoC) into Jammu and Kashmir was down to a "trickle" when compared to earlier years, as the state is seeing a decrease in the number of terrorists with less than 100 terrorists in launch pads across the LoC.
"There has been no increase in the presence of terrorists. Their numbers are decreasing," General Officer Commanding (GOC) of the Srinagar-based Chinar Corps, Lt Gen Satish Dua, told reporters in Srinagar.The army commander was addressing the media after paying floral tributes to two soldiers who were killed in an encounter with terrorists in Kupwara.
The GOC said the terrain on the LoC is such that infiltration does take place but the army has been able to limit the numbers.
"I will not deny that (infiltration is taking place). In 2015, there were more than 600 inputs of infiltration. However, because of the counter-infiltration grid and our alertness on the LoC, we have been able to limit their numbers. You all know, 10-15 years ago, the kind of infiltration that used to take place. Today, that is down to a trickle," he said.
Lt Gen Dua said the number of terrorists waiting in the launch pads across the LoC has also come down.
"The numbers that are waiting across the LoC in the launch pads used to be higher during summers. Presently, the numbers have come down. They are little under 100," he said.
Lt Gen Dua said there are higher number of inputs about infiltration attempts in Kupwara but the success of the counter-infiltration grid is that terrorist groups are not allowed to move into the hinterland.
"Since about the last three months, we had many intelligence inputs about infiltration taking place and several operations were conducted in the area of Kupwara.
"The terrorist groups have not been able to move to the hinterland because of a very effective and robust counter-infiltration grid. That is the reason that you are seeing that these kills are taking place in the area of Kupwara," he said.
Due to the treacherous terrain in that area, the terrorists who manage to cross over are trapped in the reception areas just behind the LoC, he said.
Lt Gen Dua said the Pathankot incident did not necessitate any changes for the Army in the Valley as they constantly keep improving their measures.
"Our measures on the LoC and in the depth of it were already very strong and have been like that for years. We constantly keep improving them. Pathankot incident did not have to bring about or necessitate any changes for us. We are constantly improving it and we have a robust grid on the LoC," he said.
 (This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)

