Patna:                             Close on the heels of Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) chief Lalu Prasad's apparent snub to Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar over deterioration in the law and order situation, senior party leader Raghuvansh Prasad Singh today expressed concern over the rise in crime and asked Kumar to check the slide.
"Sensational murders of engineers in Bihar recently have proved that law and order is not good in the state," said Mr Singh, a former cabinet minister in UPA-1. Expressing concern over spurt in crime, the vice-president of RJD said it was the responsibility of the state government to maintain law and order.
"Nitish Kumar, who is sitting on the driver's seat of the government, should initiate stern measures to check further slide," Mr Singh said.
He said the RJD "is sitting on the back seat and its prime duty of man on the wheel to drive the vehicle (coalition government) safely."
In a comment which may not go down well with ally JD(U), Mr Singh said, "JD(U) people are in the habit of hearing 'jay kaar' (hailing words) which they should end and take strong measures to rein in crime causing disturbance to people."
Singh said the RJD chief has rightly spoken about crime situation in Bihar and sought action in accordance with it.
Senior Janata Dal (United) or JD(U) leader and former minister Shyam Rajak said Mr Kumar has the track record of pulling Bihar out of bad days and, hence, needed no advise on law and order situation. "Even a child can give advice," he said apparently reacting to Mr Singh's views.
JD(U) spokesman Neeraj Kumar said, "11 crore citizens of Bihar did 'jay kaara' of Nitish Kumar in poll and gave three-fourth seats to the coalition headed by Kumar."
Meanwhile, Congress, a partner in the coalition government in Bihar, came in support of Mr Kumar.  "Law and order has always been the USP of Nitish Kumar for which he has won praise across the country. Some criminal incidents have taken place to which the CM is looking into and will handle it," said Bihar Education Minister Ashok Choudhary, who is also state Congress chief.
He took potshots at BJP for making adverse comments on the government in the wake of killing of engineers in Darbhanga and a few other murders.                

