Srinagar: HighlightsSyed Mueed, Hizbul chief's son rescued from terror attack in Pampore
6 people including 3 soldiers died when terrorists stormed govt building
Mueed believed to have no terror links, has distanced himself from father
                                Among some 100 people rescued by security forces when terrorists attacked a government complex in Jammu and Kashmir's Pampore last week was the son of Syed Salahuddin, the chief of the terror group Hizbul Mujahideen.
Six people including three soldiers died in the attack on the Entrepreneurship Development Institute (EDI) complex in Pampore, 16 km from Srinagar. Three terrorists were killed in a gun battle that lasted nearly three days.
Salahuddin's son Syed Mueed was trapped in the EDI office, where he works as IT manager,  when the terrorists struck on Saturday. Security personnel had to clear three buildings, floor by floor, as the terrorists used them as a concrete bunker, firing from there.
Mueed, 31, is one of Salahuddin's three sons. The police say he has no links to any terror group. Mueed has denied reports that he was questioned after the attack.
"I was not questioned by anybody. I'm like any other employee and free citizen of this state. Why is my name unnecessarily being linked  with my father after this attack?" he said to NDTV.
This was the deadliest fidayeen or suicide attack near Srinagar in six years. The police believe the terrorists, who entered the complex after attacking a security convoy and killing two soldiers, belonged to the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba.
The encounter ended on Monday evening as the nation paid tribute to the soldiers who died fighting terrorists while protecting many trapped civilians.
Syed Salahuddin, 70, is based in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir and is accused of launching the most number of attacks against security forces in Jammu and Kashmir. He runs the United Jihad Council, an umbrella of terror outfits.
All his sons have distanced themselves from their father's activities. His other sons are a doctor and a medical assistant.
Former spy chief AS Dulat recently claimed that Salahuddin wanted to return to India but the government "wasted too much time" planning it.
Mr Dulat has said in his book that the Intelligence Bureau in Srinagar had received a call from Salahuddin requesting help in getting one of his sons enrolled in a medical college.
Mr Dulat was Special Advisor on Kashmir in former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee's office. His version was denied by the Hizbul Mujahideen.                

