London:                             Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif today said India has given fresh leads relating to the Pathankot terror attack and his country is verifying the facts to bring the perpetrators to justice.
"I have received fresh leads from India on the Pathankot attack and we will look and examine those evidences given by India. We could have hidden it or forgotten it but we asserted that we have received the evidences," Mr Sharif said."We are probing and verifying that. Once we are done with that we would definitely bring the facts forward. Along with that, we have also formed a special investigating team, they would go to India and collect more evidence," Mr Sharif said in London on his arrival from Davos after attending the World Economic Forum.
"I had a word with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and he had offered every help possible from their side in bringing the perpetrators to justice. We are going on the right lines and I hope the perpetrators will be brought to justice soon," said Mr Sharif who promised further Pakistani action to combat militants but conceded that progress had often been slow.
India gave "specific and actionable information" to Pakistan soon after the Pathankot attack reportedly carried out by Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists on the intervening night of January 1 and 2 that killed seven Indian soldiers.
Pakistani National Security Advisor Lt General Naseer Khan Janjua on January 5 called up his Indian counterpart Ajit Doval during which they discussed "specific and actionable information" related to the Pathankot terror strike.
Mr Doval and Mr Janjua talked about various information and leads, like the Pakistani numbers which the attackers had called and their intercepts with India asserting that an effective action on part of Pakistan was important.
Mr Sharif was speaking days after a deadly attack by heavily armed gunmen on a university near Peshawar killed 21 people.
The attack bore a chilling resemblance to the December, 2014 Peshawar school attack in which over 150 people, mostly children, were killed, prompting the government to launch a National Action Plan (NAP) cracking down on militancy.
Mr Sharif said Pakistan would continue the fight against militants. "We will fulfil this responsibility," he said.                

