Alwar: HighlightsBJP MLA from Ramgarh, Rajasthan under fire for listing JNU 'sins'
MLA: 3,000 beer cans, 3,000 used condoms found daily at JNU
#BJPCountsCondoms among top trends on Twitter
                                A BJP lawmaker from Rajasthan has provoked mostly derision after he read out a bizarre grocery list of "sins" committed in the Jawaharlal Nehru University or JNU, whose students are currently at war with the central government. Gyandev Ahuja says he gleaned the data from social media and TV channels.
"In JNU daily you find 3,000 beer cans and bottles, 2,000 Indian liquor bottles, 10,000 cigarette butts, 4,000 beedis, 50,000 bone pieces,  2,000 wrappers of chips, 3,000 used condoms and 500 abortion injections," Mr Ahuja said on Monday during a march he had organized in Rajasthan's Alwar, around 150 km from Delhi, to protest against JNU "traitors".
The condoms are "used for committing misdeeds with our sisters and daughters," said the 63-year-old politician, who declares in his biodata that he has studied till Class 12.
The legislator went on to say that drugs are taken on the campus and "after 8, there are cultural programmes in which boys and girls dance naked."
As the comments were ridiculed on social media, #BJPCountsCondoms became a top trend on Twitter.
Mr Ahuja moonlights as a stage actor and is known for his portrayal of "Ravana" in Ram Lila every year.  He was passed over twice when ministers were selected for the Vasundhara Raje government in the state.
The list was meant to bolster Mr Ahuja's argument that anti-national activities are rampant on the JNU campus. He said: "When Ma Durga Ashtami is celebrated, they celebrate (demon) Mahishasura Jayanti."
The comments come at a time the Centre is confronting the anger of students who have accused it of crushing dissent. The students are demanding the release of Kanhaiya Kumar, who was arrested on sedition charges for allegedly making anti-national statements at an on-campus event to mark the anniversary of the hanging of terrorist Afzal Guru. Five more students have been charged with sedition over the event.                

