Both US an Russia governments are hypocrites and cynical, specially regarding foreign policies.The arms trade reflects their global geopolitical interests.Even more cynical people taking sides and believing one is "good" and the other "bad".How come some believe a country has the right to support a dictator while the other country don't?There is no difference.


Russia's figures are the most impressive. With an economy the size of Italy, or Texas, and with 'crippling' trade embargoes following its invasion of Ukraine, it still manages 25% of the world's trade in death & destruction.


Putin spreading traditional Russian values around the world.


Since they put embargoes on Russia, that's probably the only way they can make any money for the country. Besides, since the F35 fiasco, Russia's sales of fighter aircraft has probably risen significantly since other countries will be less trusting of American aircraft in future. 


I am sure that US and UK arm exports are greater than the numbers listed above, therefore Russian figures are actually lower.Independent should include the US and UK arms exports towards "moderate terrorists" in Syria, Lybia, Iraq,etc


The establishment of UK is planning to spend 100bn for Uncle Sam's Trident "defence" system.


Which they'd be begging to put here for free anyway like always if Cameron wasn't offering them our money


True, the American government just love to make everyone else a target as well.Which is probably why they didn't launch an attack on Assad alone and pave the way for their ISIS chums when the UK voted against joining them.


What a twisted view of the facts.


corrupt and insane, give us a referendum on Trident if you dare Cameron.


Uncle Sam, Christian in name, Satan in nature.


Notice how 4 of the top 8 importers shown are islamic countries. RoP?


To put it into slightly different wording : The United States of North America are the biggest dealer in death, misery and destruction ! Any wars on that programmed ?


The US are the biggest dealers in everything though. Russia on the other hand deals only in death and destruction and increasing global warming. 


I didn't see Putin launching unprovoked attacks on Middle East countries to depose their leaders. The only time he intervened was against ISIS.Seems to me the Americans need to keep a leash on their president to stop him interfering with the politics of other countries.


Here we see the real driver behind the 'War on terror'.


I expect the USA exports of weapons to decline due to the F 35. I mean after spending billions pre-ordering this lemon who will trust USA technology again? The only mission it will successfully carry out is delivering billions of tax payer dollars to Lockheed Martin.


That's the simple truth.


Russia!!!....straight into the pockets of the Oligarch Mafia


