For the benefit of the 'outers' that are trying to claim that a Brexit is good news, take a look at this recent prediction:http://tinyurl.com/jy55xvo


Just retired and enjoying holidays in Europe and the US.OK ,these may cost more if we leave the EU but its a price worth paying to be free of this odious organisation.


What all these parasites are actually saying is that they have made a killing out of the EU, the spoils were not shared with ordinary folk, and that they want to stay in EU so the gravy train keeps on rolling along. Hedge fund managers indeed!


Yet more asinine, emotive language. The pound is being 'punished' for daring to think that any country can be sovereign. All of the other currencies are aligned against it, making an example of it.Or, maybe the strength of the dollar could be reflecting something else; could it be that the next President has vowed to 'make America great again'? Could it be that the US is going to be transformed from a debt-laden, high unemployment, job exporting relic to an economic powerhouse?Oh, and the FTSE is higher as we speak. Clearly no punishment there, perhaps unconfined joy instead.


Just look at the EZ; massive unemployment, acute youth unemployment, slipping into recession and drowning in debt.All of that before you even look at the social breakdown across the continent.


It makes me laugh when big companies say we must stay in Europe and keep the single market otherwise it will damage the U.K and the companies concerned. Well that's one hell of an assumption to make isn't it!!Did these companies ever consider there will be a new trade agreement negotiated with Europe and its highly probable the U.K will get good, if not bettet terms and end up the winner in the medium to long term, (i have also assumed Cameron is not doing the negotiating this time as he bulls up the last one).


Big companies love it because the EU ensures that small companies struggle with endless regulations, red tape and so on.Big company cartels are welcomed with open arms.


