Before it was a free bag the govt got nothing. Now they get VAT and are earning millions.


I have never thrown out an empty plastic bag - they are too useful as bin/waste paper basket liners. Now I buy bulk carrier bags for shopping which are "recycled" as waste bags. Makes more sense than buying "bin liners".


https://l.facebook.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPFAX64v4Ldk%26feature%3Dyoutu.be&h=6AQFDoWHo


In my local Tesco they're very keen indeed to sell you a 5p plastic bag. As soon as you put down your basket at the checkout, the checkout guy/girl whips out a plastic bag and starts putting your stuff into it. It seems to annoy them when I produce my own bag. Their markup on these plastic bags is a bigger profit margin than anything else they sell!


My experience is very different. I always get asked first, and checkout operators always seem happy for me to use my own bag. 


What about using the good old common or garden RookSack?


They're excellent for carrying corvids and chess pieces too


I wouldn't crow about it if I were you.


Must be raven mad.


Why don't you get the cloth bags in Britain that you can get for about 20p in mainland Europe? They go over the shoulder, last forever and are much nicer than plastic. 


We do.


Yet another example of unnecessary government interference. Petty minded interfering regulation that gives necessary intervention a bad name. More bureaucrats seeking petty ways to continue their ride on the gravy train.


The 5p bag gravy train? What?


5p multiplied by the number of bags sold is going to be millions if not billion of pounds


Which has to be donated to charity. And even if this requirement isn't followed, the shop keeps it. So I don't see how the bureaucrat benefits unless they're getting back handed bags to flog on.


eu gets the vati have never purchased one


No, EU regulations give a framework in which the nations can set their own VAT rules. The EU doesn't collect and keep the VAT though.


Good on you for taking your own bags, but it's UK VAT that is paid to the UK government.


The government probably spends more on dealing with people moaning about the bag charge than it receives in VAT on bag sales. 


Read carefully, Mark. Bureaucrats are on a "gravy train at our expenses. They have outlived their usefulness, but want to stay on the gravy train so keep on dreaming up more, and ever more petty schemems to keep themselves "in office".
We should get rid of them from the public payroll.


Read carefully Chris and I'll explain just why your comment is ridiculous.In 2014, 8.5 billion plastic bags were taken from supermarkets. Weighing approximately 5g each, that's 42,500 tonnes of plastic, most of which ends up at landfill. How is a bid to reduce this ridiculous and inefficient use of our limited resources a petty scheme? This scheme has had considerable success in Wales, so we know it's going to work at least reasonably well. And finally, these bureaucrats that you think should be fired, are employed to carry out a wide variety of roles. Without them, the government would not be able to function (so they've hardly outlived their usefulness). They were given the task of investigating, researching and implementing this scheme by ministers, they didn't make it up to keep their jobs. If they weren't employed directly by the state, this scheme would have been contracted to a private company to develop and would have cost a lot more money. And gravy train? With a few notable (and unacceptable exceptions) they get paid a lot less than people think.


What are you talking about? You get a product at a reasonable cost, the environment benefits, charities benefit. People can bring their own bags to avoid the charge or pay a pittance to buy one. Carrier bags are harsh on the hands, for one thing. 


There was no need for this charge, the used bags are useful for other purposes (such as bin lining) which now have to be bought separately. it is just another case of 


Bin lining sales did not go up to the same extent as bag take went down in Wales. And ther is no sign of it doing so in England. Despite your gripes, it's a sensible scheme and a successful one.


My corner shop, that is not actually required to charge for bags, now asks every single customer if they need a bag whereas they used to be dead stingy.


