New Delhi:                             Ahead of an all-party meeting over the Budget session, Parliamentary Affairs Minister M Venkaiah Naidu today defended the government over the JNU issue, asserting it has not erred anywhere, and said they would look to have "broader consensus" on important bills including Goods and Services Tax (GST) and real estate.
Mr Naidu said the Centre was keen to push key legislations like the GST Bill, the Real Estate Bill, the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Bill, the Inland Waterways Bill, the Carriage by Air (amendment) Bill, Anti-Hijacking Bill and the one to grant voting rights to people post India-Bangladesh Land Boundary Agreement.
"I have invited parties for an all-party meeting. One meeting has already taken place with the Prime Minister, another one with the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
"We will discuss the government's agenda and the bills it wants to take up and also the issues the opposition intends to raise. This is a regular exercise I undertake ahead of Parliament session," the Union Parliamentary Affairs Minister said.
The Budget session of Parliament, which begins on Tuesday, is expected to be very stormy. The government requires the opposition's support in the Rajya Sabha to pass key legislations.
"GST is our priority. We have an experience of two sessions. The countrymen wants the GST, Real Estate, bankruptcy and Inland waterways, Carriage by Air and anti-hijacking bill, Constitutional Amendments Bill. I will talk to them, will have a broader consensus and go forward," Mr Naidu said.
Asked about a possible stormy session with the opposition expected to raise the JNU and Rohith Vemula issue, Mr Naidu said the government has not made mistake anywhere and willing to discuss all issues.
"The country is huge and there are bound to be issues and Parliament is a place to discuss them all. Either it is JNU, or Hyderabad University or any other issue, the government has no hesitation to discuss them. The government has no made mistake anywhere... Everyone has a chance to raise issue, but do it by rules. Debate, discuss and decide. Do not disrupt," Mr Naidu said.                

