One Judge Makes the Case for Judgment


Judge John Coughenour is a rebel. It’s not because—or not only because—he rides a Harley or spends his free time in prisons. It’s that the Reagan-appointed U.S. District Court judge has rebelled against federal sentencing guidelines ever since they were established in the mid-1980s.But Coughenour had never earned national attention for his nonconformist ideas about sentencing and punishment—until, that is, al-Qaeda trainee Ahmed Ressam appeared in his courtroom in the spring of 2001. Over the course of the next 11 years, Coughenour would sit down to sentence Ressam to prison on three separate occasions, all for the same crime—two times to huge uproar and one time to clarify the sentence once and for all.In 1999, 32-year-old Ahmed Ressam had planned to detonate a massive car bomb at Los Angeles International Airport on New Year’s Eve. Had he succeeded, it would likely have been the deadliest bombing in U.S. history. Fortunately, Ressam was caught a thousand miles from his goal. He was tried and convicted in federal court. The jury returned its guilty verdict in April 2001—and that’s when the fight over Ressam’s fate really began.As the judge presiding over Ressam’s trial, Coughenour’s job was to determine the would-be terrorist’s punishment. His sentencing should have been a straightforward computation, based on the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s Guidelines Manual. A jury found Ressam guilty. By law, his sentence should have been 65 years to life.When the trial ended, however, Ressam’s sentencing was postponed. Ressam had struck a deal with federal agents to cooperate in terror investigations. In fact, when the 9/11 attacks occurred a few months later, Ressam was the best-connected al-Qaeda acolyte willing to work with the U.S. government. He helped identify terrorists from security-camera footage and even assisted with the aftermath of the “shoe-bomber” in December 2001. But by 2005, Ressam had stopped working with agents. (Coughenour says Ressam became embittered by years of solitary confinement.) He even recanted some of his prior testimony. Since Ressam was no longer cooperating, he was put back up for sentencing. In recognition of Ressam’s assistance to the United States, the government asked for 35 years—30 less than the original minimum penalty. It was a good deal by any measure, especially so soon after 9/11, when terrorism prosecutions were not known for leniency.Coughenour, though, was swayed by Ressam’s years of cooperation—which, the judge maintains, put Ressam’s life in danger. It’s a dilemma Judge Stefan Underhill recently described in The New York Times: “Which man was I sentencing?” he asked, referring to a repentant gang member. “The murderer or the remorseful cooperator?” Coughenour was similarly moved by Ressam’s condition. Since his arrest, Ressam had been held in solitary confinement, and it had changed him. Coughenour says that, at his trial, Ressam had “had a pleasant demeanor about him.” But in the fours years since then, while cooperating with the government, Ressam had become “thinner, and drawn, and haggard.” And Coughenour knew that every year Ressam spent in prison was almost certainly another year in solitary confinement—a fairly standard measure for terrorists as well as for those cooperating with law enforcement. The judge felt for the hapless Algerian and thought it would be in the interest of justice to lay off a bit on the penalty’s harshness. After all, Coughenour reasoned, Ressam never did set off the bomb. Ressam’s lawyers had asked for 12 and a half years. Coughenour split the difference with the government’s request for 35 and went with 22 years. That was the first time Coughenour sentenced Ressam. Coughenour says now, “I thought—wrongly it turned out—that the sentencing was pretty straightforward.”Immediately afterward, a furor erupted in the national media and among those who question Coughenour’s overall approach to punishment. Fox News’ Michelle Malkin dubbed Coughenour the “terrorists’ little helper,” arguing that he represented everything that was wrong with judge-centered sentencing. Critics slammed Coughenour, saying his sympathy for the defendant had trumped national safety. After 22 years, they reasoned, Ressam would be middle-aged when he got out, fully capable of staging another attack.But Coughenour sees part of his role as protecting the accused from a sometimes-bloodthirsty media, especially when it comes to sentencing.Coughenour was appointed during President Ronald Reagan’s first year in office, a few years before the federal sentencing guidelines were created. The new system was meant to counteract the wild inconsistencies in the sentences handed down in different courts. Instead of going simply by intuition, federal judges would now refer to a handbook that established a sentencing range. And any discretion on the part of judges was intended to be restricted to the limits of that range. But what some saw as a reasonable step toward greater justice, Coughenour saw as inhumane and robotic. What’s the point of a judge if he is discouraged from offering his judgment?Once on the fringe, Coughenour’s argument against sentencing guidelines is now gaining traction. At the heart of the debate is an undecided question: Which is scarier—a world where a person’s actions are treated as part of a mathematical equation blind to context, or a world where political appointees decide people’s fates based on gut feelings?Coughenour’s position is clear. He believes that the standardization of sentences has resulted in less justice, not more, and that the way the nation sentences criminals today has created greater inequality, not less. Underhill agrees. “The tragedy of mass incarceration,” he writes, “has recently focused much attention on the need to reform … the federal-sentencing guidelines, which often direct judges to impose excessive sentences.” Underhill also thinks prisoners deserve a “second-look review”—“a mechanism for judges to re-evaluate the sentences they’ve imposed.” For his part, Coughenour would dismantle standardized criminal sentencing entirely. “But,” he adds meaningfully, “you’ve got to trust the person making the decision.”How Perceptions About Opportunity Vary by RaceRessam’s 22-year sentence in 2005 was overturned on procedural grounds. And when the case came up again in 2008, the government sought a life sentence. But Coughenour saw no reason for his decision to change; he again imposed a 22-year sentence. Coughenour cited Ressam’s favorable psychiatric report and noted with sympathy that Ressam “spent many years in solitary confinement in a country far from his family and loved ones.” The judge also pointed out that other terrorists, including John Walker Lindh, an American, had been sentenced to 20 years or less. “In the time since Mr. Ressam’s first sentencing,” Coughenour concluded, “I have come to feel even more confident that the sentence I originally imposed was the correct one.” That was the second time Coughenour sentenced Ressam.The Ninth Circuit disagreed. In a scathing 72-page opinion, a panel of judges concluded that Coughenour had “abused his discretion” by flouting the guidelines. And so, on October 24, 2012, almost 11 years since Ressam first appeared before Coughenour (and nearly 13 years since his arrest), the judge was ready to give Ressam his third and final sentence. He looked at all the lawyers and journalists packed into his Seattle courtroom. Would he go along with the government’s request for a life sentence? Or would he again thumb his nose at the system?Coughenour (he pronounces it “coon-our’) looks uncannily like Statler, the taller and grumpier of the critics from The Muppet Show—they even cross their hands the same way—and he shares the Muppet’s penchant for avuncular wisecracks. He was 39 when Reagan tapped him for the bench, making him part of a wave of young, conservative judges that Reagan ushered into the federal judiciary. Since then, Coughenour has become one of the most senior and respected judges in the United States. His work ethic is legendary—even when he took senior status, a sort of judicial semi-retirement, he insisted on maintaining a full caseload. Mark Bennett, a federal judge in Iowa, says that Coughenour even volunteers to help other districts cover their caseloads. “Anybody who knows Jack knows a couple of things about him,” says Bennett. “He’s very smart. He’s incredibly hardworking. He’s incredibly dedicated and takes his job seriously. And he does what he thinks is right.”One of Coughenour’s early projects was lobbying successfully for a federal prison in the Northwest. Before Federal Correction Institution, Sheridan, was built with Coughenour’s support, prisoners’ families in Washington and Oregon often had to travel a thousand miles or more to make visits. In May 1989, Coughenour rode his Harley-Davidson motorcycle down the Pacific coast to Sheridan to attend the prison’s opening. While touring the facility with the warden, Coughenour heard someone say, “Hey, judge!” and turned to see a man dressed in prison garb.“I’m sorry,” Coughenour said. “I don’t recognize you.”“Well, you ought to,” he remembers the prisoner replying. “You’re the one that sentenced me!” They spoke for a few minutes and parted.Shortly after he returned to Seattle, Coughenour got a call from Sheridan’s warden, who told him the encounter had “caused quite a stir.” Prisoners were pleased that a judge had taken the time to come to a prison in the first place, but they were even more amazed that he’d taken the time to have a conversation with someone he had sentenced.“You know,” Coughenour said to the warden, “there have to be a lot of people down there that I have sentenced. How would you feel about me coming down and meeting with them?”So, twice a year for almost 20 years, Coughenour rode his Harley from Seattle to Sheridan to meet one on one with each of the men he had sentenced. And then, he started visiting prisons all over the country with the same purpose. To ensure candor, he insisted that the prisoners be unshackled and that the meetings be private. A corrections officer stood outside just in case, but in two decades, Coughenour only had to call the officer in once.During these meetings, the judge always asked the same questions: “How much time do you have left? What are you doing to prepare yourself for getting out? Are you dealing with anything you can’t handle? Do you feel safe?” Sometimes, he’d compare notes about motorcycles—word traveled fast that the judge rode a Harley—and sometimes he’d just commiserate about prison food. The next prisoner would be escorted in 15 minutes later, and the judge would start over again. Coughenour resists the implication that his visits—and the hundreds of hours he has spent asking hundreds of prisoners about their lives—have influenced his judicial philosophy. But at the same time, Coughenour insists that the prisoners’ stories all carry a clear moral lesson: Too many people are in prison for too long.One of Coughenour’s favorite anecdotes from these visits is about a man from Everett, Washington, whose wife had multiple sclerosis. In the mid-1980s, the man was laid off from his job and, in desperate need of money, robbed five banks. Coughenour, who was then a young judge, now says, “I gave him a heavy hit.” A few years after he sentenced the man, Coughenour saw the bank robber again, this time in the meeting room at Sheridan. He sat across from him again six months later. And again the next year. “Every time I went back to Sheridan,” he says, “I saw this guy, and I started realizing how long it was that he was doing. And the meaning of time really hits you hard when you see these same guys there, year after year after year, and they’re still there. It’s easy to sit in an office room somewhere and say, ‘Well, you know, you rob a bank, you should get 10 years.’” But watching those decisions play out among real men in real time was something else entirely.This sort of thinking is divisive. Judge Richard Sullivan of New York, the former head of narcotics at the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Manhattan, says, “Judges are generally very good at recognizing the humanity of the person in front of them.” He argues that it’s the humanity of victims that judges too often ignore. “Candidly,” he says, as a counterpoint to Coughenour’s prison visits, “I'm not sure how many judges have walked around Hunt’s Point or some other neighborhood that’s been overrun by drugs and drug violence to get a feel for the impact of these crimes on communities and families.”“Judges,” Sullivan says, “should also have some humility and recognize that we aren’t, and probably shouldn’t be, the only players in this drama.”For most of history, sentencing was not a judge’s burden. Crimes carried a predetermined punishment, usually a fine, corporal punishment, or, for a staggering number of offenses, death. In England and the United States, the jury effectively determined the punishment as soon as it decided the defendant’s guilt or innocence. All the judge did was referee the proceedings and formally announce the sentence. By the end of the 18th century, however, many colonial Americans protested what they saw as an overuse of torture and death as punishments. And so, in the first decades of the 19th century, Philadelphia’s Quaker-led government developed a novel, more humane way of dealing with convicts: incarceration. Previously, jails had been used to house people awaiting trial or execution, but imprisonment had not generally been used as a punishment in its own right. The only problem was that now someone had to determine the appropriate amount of time each convict should spend in prison.That responsibility fell to judges, which appealed to Americans’ predilection for checks and balances: The jury would determine guilt or innocence, the judge would determine punishment if necessary, and neither would interfere with the finding of the other. Also it was efficient: The judge was already in the courtroom. It wasn’t long before it became legal dogma that the members of the jury are the “finders of fact” and the judge is the “finder of law,” including handing down sentences. For a century and a half, judges wielded this power with essentially unfettered discretion, but the system had drawbacks. Judges had no governing body, and they approached sentencing differently: Some saw incarceration as rehabilitative, while others saw it as retribution, or as a deterrent, or as a way to segregate dangerous people from society. And judges were not immune to the vicissitudes of public opinion. The potential for abuse of power was patent. Sentencing decisions were not even subject to a higher court’s review.By the middle of the 20th century, skeptics began asking why judges should be trusted to make such complex decisions unilaterally. Were judges supposed to have an inherent sense of how long a miscreant should spend in prison? After all, sentencing was not taught in law schools, and judges received no training in how to sentence fairly—many were not even lawyers. Nancy Gertner, a Harvard Law professor and former federal judge, wrote in 2010 that judges were “surgeons without Gray’s Anatomy.” And that is the crux of the opposition to Coughenour’s argument: For too long Americans exclusively trusted the wisdom of judges who, of course, were just as a fallible as anyone else. Besides, it was judges themselves who became the first proponents of reform.In a January 1960 essay in The Atlantic, Judge Irving Kaufman bemoaned the fact that “neither the judge nor the legislature has any real scientific guide” to sentencing. “If the hundreds of American judges who sit on criminal cases were polled as to what was the most trying facet of their jobs,” Kaufman wrote, “the vast majority would almost certainly answer ‘Sentencing.’” With all the advances in behavioral science, he wondered, couldn’t there be some sort of guide? Kaufman noted that, in 1959, “the average prison sentence meted out in the federal courts ranged from nine months in Vermont to 58 months in southern Iowa.”In fact, sentences handed down by different judges for the same crimes varied so widely that the disparities could not simply be explained by the contexts of the cases. Biases of all sorts prevailed: Race, class, education, and mental illness all influenced judges. In 1972, Judge Marvin Frankel of New York critiqued these tendencies in his influential Criminal Sentences: Law Without Order. “The almost wholly unchecked and sweeping powers we give to judges in the fashioning of sentences are terrifying and intolerable for a society that professes devotion to the rule of law,” he wrote. Frankel’s solution was to create what he called a “Commission on Sentencing.” At first, his ideas were mostly relegated to law-review debates. If his book hadn’t caught the eye of an influential U.S. senator, Frankel’s influence might have stopped there.Instead, Ted Kennedy read Frankel’s book and was stirred by the judge’s lament of lenient sentences for white-collar criminals, many of whom had gone to the same colleges and prep schools as their judges. In 1975, Kennedy worked with Stephen Breyer—then the senator’s protégé, now a Supreme Court justice—to create a bill to standardize and reform federal sentencing procedures. Pitching the legislation to Democrats as a way to make sure malfeasant bankers got their due, Kennedy tried and failed for a decade to get some version of it passed in Congress. What he needed was a conservative backer.A change in the political environment handed Kennedy two of them. Shortly after Coughenour’s appointment in 1981, Reagan announced that the he was “taking down the surrender flag that has flown over so many drug efforts” and beginning the modern War on Drugs. Soon thereafter, sentencing reform became bipartisan. That’s when Kennedy was approached by Strom Thurmond and Orrin Hatch, archconservatives whose politics rarely aligned with the liberal Bostonian’s. Of course, their reasons for wanting to overhaul federal sentencing policies were not the same. Where Kennedy was keen to ensure white-collar criminals were punished fairly, Thurmond and Hatch were eager to see drug offenders receive harsh and consistent sentences nationwide. The trio crafted a bill based in part on Frankel’s suggestions from a decade before. The Sentencing Reform Act was signed into law in October 1984. Among other things, it created the U.S. Sentencing Commission, which unveiled its new guidelines in 1987.The sentencing guidelines are essentially an algorithm. For each charge, the judge inputs the crime’s “base offense level” and makes adjustments based on factors like the defendant’s role in the crime, his acceptance of responsibility, and whether he had a gun. The resulting value, from one to 43, is the defendant’s “offense level.” The judge then uses a table to cross-reference the offense level with another number based on the defendant’s prior convictions. At the intersection of the offense level and the criminal-history category, the judge finds the “guideline range,” an upper and lower sentencing limit. Some judges call this process “grid and bear it.”Coughenour watched the standardization of sentences with dismay. He was one of about 200 judges who wrote opinions finding the guidelines unconstitutional. The Supreme Court overruled all 200 objections in 1989. “It was terribly frustrating,” Coughenour says. “I started screaming at the top of my lungs. I have been screaming ever since … I was imposing sentences that made no sense at all.”Coughenour recalls the story of a young man he’d sentenced in the early 1980s: “He came from a good family. He was going to college. He was doing well in everything, but he was selling pot. And he was devastated by the indictment and was overwhelmed with his remorse. And I said, ‘You know, I’m going to take a chance on you. I’m going to give you straight probation. I’m not going to send you to prison.’” Twenty years later, Coughenour received a letter from that man, who thanked the judge for the chance and said that his life had turned out very well. “I couldn’t do that after the guidelines,” says Coughenour. “It would have gone up on review, and it would have been reversed.”Of course, this is just the sort of story that raises the hackles of sentencing reformers from both parties. Conservatives see injustice when a criminal gets off easy because a judge takes a shine to him. Liberals see injustice when a white college student gets out on parole while prisons are crammed with people who less closely resemble the mostly white, educated judiciary. But Coughenour brushes these concerns aside. He insists that handing down unique sentences is the point: “The thing that really hit me hard with the Sentencing Reform Act was that this art form—I considered sentencing to be an art and not a science—Congress tried to convert it into a science. And it’s not a science. It’s a human being dealing with other human beings. And it shouldn’t be done by computers.”After a brief judicial revolt in the late 1980s, most judges quietly fell into compliance with the guidelines. Coughenour, too, sentenced mostly within the prescribed range, though he railed against the guidelines in his opinions and tried to bend the rules when he thought he could get away with it. During this time, Coughenour and others maintain, the power to decide federal sentences actually shifted from judges to prosecutors. Mark Osler, a law professor who worked as a prosecutor in Detroit in the 1990s, says: “I had all the power. It was about whether I filed a notice of enhancement or gave points for acceptance of responsibility. It’s not reviewable. It’s within the discretion of the prosecutor.”And prosecutors have even more power, Coughenour and others say, when it comes to mandatory minimums. In 1986, a year before the guidelines were rolled out, the Anti-Drug Abuse Act created minimum penalties for certain crimes. These were not technically part of the 1987 guideline scheme, which prescribed a sentence range based on particular inputs from the case. Mandatory minimums, however, established firm sentences for specific crimes regardless of the facts of the case. At the time, crack was tearing through America’s cities, and demand for severe penalties was high. The Anti-Drug Abuse Act established the notorious 100-to-one ratio, treating one gram of crack as equivalent to 100 grams of cocaine. (That ratio has since been reduced to a still-problematic 18-to-one.) Though both guidelines and minimums are often spoken of in the same breath, especially by their detractors (including Coughenour), some mandatory minimums may be on the way out. A bipartisan coalition of lawmakers, including GOP leadership in both chambers, has seemed poised to reduce minimums for nonviolent offenders. But a group of more conservative Republicans is fighting to scuttle this reform.Over time, mandatory minimum penalties have been expanded beyond drug crimes. A glance through an index of America’s mandatory minimum crimes is a good guide to society’s evolving fears: firearm crimes, child pornography, terrorism, and, increasingly, some sex offenses. The controversy over these sentences has even spilled out of the legal community. The recent militia standoff in Oregon, for example, began over a protest of mandatory minimums for committing arson on federal land, which is covered under expansive terrorism laws. The judge in the case imposed a sentence that was less than the five-year mandatory minimum—but the U.S. attorney appealed the sentence. Now the convicted men will have to serve more time than they were originally led to believe. That’s because mandatory minimums always supersede the 1987 sentencing guidelines: A judge cannot issue a lighter sentence even if the guidelines suggest otherwise.“So much of sentencing discretion is vested now in the U.S. Attorney’s Office,” Coughenour says. “By their charging decisions, they can tie the hands of the sentencing judge, particularly on mandatory minimums. And [prosecutors’] discretion, by the way, is exercised in darkness.” In other words, prosecutors can charge defendants under any statute they choose, and there is no way to review that decision. If that statute carries a hefty minimum sentence, the judge cannot lighten the punishment. “What we do,” he says, referring to judges, “we do out in the sunlight, and we have to be subject to appellate review. We have to explain ourselves. We have to endure press reaction to what we do.” On the other hand, nobody reviews the U.S. attorney’s decisions. “In fact,” says Coughenour, “we are precluded from reviewing those charging decisions. And here you have people who are put on the bench by the president of the United States and confirmed by the United States Senate—presumably for their judgment. I mean, that’s why they call it ‘judging.’”At a sentencing hearing this summer in Seattle, I saw Coughenour’s disdain for mandatory minimums in action. The defendant had been found guilty of a particularly loathsome crime: sexually assaulting his 6-year-old niece. Sputtering and twitchy, the man had a long history of mental illness and addiction. He had fled an abusive father and spent his life on the streets of the Lummi Indian Reservation. Now, he was facing the standard sentence for his crime: 30 years to life.But Coughenour pushed back in court. “Is there a sentence below the mandatory minimum that would be adequate?” he asked the prosecutor.“Your Honor,” replied the prosecutor, “I am hamstrung here, in that my personal views are probably irrelevant.”“Not to me, they aren’t,” countered Coughenour. He pressed the prosecutor in this vein for 10 minutes, before he got to the point.“Does it trouble you at all,” he asked, raising his voice, “that sentencing decisions like this are made at a committee table back in Washington, D.C., without the benefit of a full trial and a pre-sentence report and individualized consideration of the facts in a given case? Does that bother you at all?” In the end, Coughenour declared the 30-year minimum sentence unconstitutional in this case, saying it violated the Eighth Amendment’s protection against “cruel and unusual punishment.”The federal sentencing scheme changed again 11 years ago, though not enough for Coughenour. In 2005, the Supreme Court decided in United States v. Booker that, so long as guidelines were considered mandatory, they were unconstitutional. But, wrote Steven Breyer in the opinion that saved the system he helped create, the guidelines would stand if they were ruled as purely advisory, a baseline from which judges could depart at will. This means judges must still calculate the guidelines during sentencing, but they are allowed to sentence outside of them—provided they give a good reason for the departure.“Booker did a lot in terms of making judges feel that they were authorized to depart more frequently from the guidelines,” Coughenour allows. But he argues that the original policy irreversibly changed the way judges sentence: “Back before I came on the bench, the incarceration rate in the U.S. was around 120 per 100,000, and it skyrocketed after the War on Drugs, to point where it’s in excess of 700 per 100,000,” says Coughenour, shaking his head. “That’s the highest incarceration rate anywhere in the world, including South Africa under apartheid or the Soviet Union back when it was the Soviet Union. Nobody has ever had an incarceration rate as high as ours is now.”Though mandatory minimums are still controversial, overall most judges seem happy with the current system. Gertner, the Harvard professor who compared judges to surgeons, says that judges who started their careers after the late 1980s “have become inured to the guidelines … they have come to think that the guidelines defined fairness.” Osler, the former Detroit prosecutor, agrees: “The whole structure is still guidelines-focused … That baseline seems so objective. It’s a number, and there’s this presumptive objectivity when you’re looking at something that says, ‘121 months.’ Because it’s so specific, it has this veneer of science around it. Where, in reality, it’s pretty much just made up.” Coughenour thinks some judges are over-reliant on guidelines and apply them without thinking about the consequences. “[Guidelines] make sentencing easy,” he says. Too easy.And yet, the data seem to show that judges are exercising discretion. As of last summer, according to the U.S. Sentencing Commission, fewer than half (47 percent) of all sentences fell within the guidelines range. About 51 percent of sentences fell below the guidelines. Just about 2 percent were above. And even these national averages conceal huge disparities among regions. The Second Circuit (New York, Connecticut, and Vermont) follows the guidelines only 28 percent of the time. In the Fifth Circuit (Louisiana, Texas, and Mississippi), however, 64 percent of sentences fall within the guidelines. What’s more, these numbers conceal more disparities among districts. Within the Second Circuit, for instance, guideline compliance ranges from 54 percent in the Northern District of New York to less than 17 percent in the adjacent District of Vermont. Coughenour’s own Western District of Washington follows the guidelines 34 percent of the time, which is higher than the Ninth Circuit’s 28 percent average. And even those variations conceal discrepancies among judges. Coughenour, for instance, says his sentences are only about 20 percent compliant.Don’t these inconsistencies represent just what Coughenour wants? All of these differences would seem to imply that judges have broken free from the robotic guidelines regime. On the contrary, Coughenour and every judge I spoke to—including those who disagree with Coughenour—largely chalk those discrepancies up to prosecutors, not judges. Each U.S. Attorney’s Office has an endemic culture. A district with low compliance could be one in which prosecutors routinely overcharge, asking for heftier-than-necessary punishments. Conversely, a district with high compliance could be one in which prosecutors generally ask for more lenient sentences or for sentences that already fall within the guidelines. But it’s hard to know, since prosecutors’ decision-making processes are off the record and unreviewable.And that is Coughenour’s point. For all the capriciousness of pre-reform sentencing, a judge’s decisions were made in open court, and the judge owned them. Whether the punishment was just or not, the words of each decision were forever available to the public. It was imperfect, but at least it was out in the open.The public wants an ideal arbiter: just, wise, and knowing. But while questing for that mythical, paternal figure who will make all the right decisions, it’s easy to become disillusioned with the inconsistency and fallibility of human beings. The sentencing guidelines were an idealistic gesture, an expression of the belief that there is some objective measure of justice.Coughenour had sentenced Ahmed Ressam to 22-year sentences twice—in 2005 and in 2008. Both sentences had been overturned and had ignited a public and legal uproar. In fact, after the second sentencing, the Ninth Circuit not only overturned Coughenour’s decision again but it recommended that the case be sent to a different judge altogether, because “the district judge’s previously expressed views appear too entrenched to allow for the appearance of fairness.” That stipulation was removed from the case on further review, but Coughenour had his orders: Find a harsher sentence. He was pointedly reminded that the minimum guideline was 65 years.Still, Coughenour wanted to be sure that Ressam’s third sentence did not come from fear. When he speaks about it now, he tells of a chance encounter he had with Ressam’s lawyer in Washington, D.C. The lawyer told him that Ressam had expressed surprise that he had received a fair trial in America and that his subsequent cooperation with the government had stemmed from that feeling. Others, however, are quick to point out that Ressam’s assistance looks opportunistic—only after he was facing life in prison did he agree to help. But Coughenour holds the story close: It confirms all of his ideas about the U.S. justice system and the redemptive power of a trial held in open court.Nearly 11 years since Coughenour first met Ressam, the judge was ready to hand down his third and final sentence. On October 24, 2012, he addressed his Seattle courtroom: “Many, including the federal government, believe that Mr. Ressam is a continuing threat and he should never see freedom again. But fear is not, nor has it ever been, the guide for a federal sentencing judge. It is a foul ingredient for the sentencing calculus.” Coughenour then documented the extent of Ressam’s cooperation and the ever-increasing demands of the prosecutors. In the dense legalese of the decision’s core, Coughenour pushed back against the government’s arguments for life in prison, announcing that 37 years was sufficient to punish Ressam and to fulfill the needs of justice. It wasn’t what the government was hoping for, but it was stiff. This time, the sentence would stand.Coughenour concluded the proceedings by addressing Ressam personally: “There is a school of thought that believes our essence is defined by our actions alone … If a man has a history of violence, he must be, to his core, a violent man. These judgments overlook one thing: We can choose daily to remake that essence.” The Algerian looked beaten down; he had spent a third of his life in solitary confinement.With credit for time served, Ressam will be almost 70 when he is released. “I’ll be surprised if he survives,” Coughenour says. And if he does survive prison, it may not last, as he’ll be branded a snitch. “People who are engaged in that kind of terrorism don’t forget that their friends were convicted because of someone who was cooperating.”Whatever Ressam’s future holds, Coughenour will probably never see him again. Ressam is at the federal supermax facility in Colorado, and he is not permitted contact with outsiders. He will likely spend his entire time there in a 7-by-12-foot cell. But even if Ressam were allowed visitors, a meeting wouldn’t happen. In 2008, after a Washington State Supreme Court justice ignited a scandal by accidentally visiting an inmate with a case pending before him, Coughenour stopped going to Sheridan.He hasn’t visited a person he sentenced since.


Matt::Thursday, February 25, 2016 8:19 PM::<comment>The problem is that without these requirements, racial and gender disparities get worse.The better argument is to make more detailed guidelines instead of judges doing favors for whites, parents, women, and other groups they think deserve less harsh punishment.If we want to make this good, they could make more nuanced requirements for everyone instead of applying nuance when they feel for the perpetrator which due to human nature will be biased.</comment>

Blue Fish::Thursday, February 25, 2016 8:33 PM::<comment>I think a standard prompt that reminds judges of the various biases to which they are subject could help a lot with these issues. Moreso than the average person, judges are aware of issues of bias and trained to combat them. A brief reminder that they shouldn't go light on white-collar offenders or reach for a longer sentence when the defendant is from the hood could probably ameliorate a lot of these issues. A good review process to identify and redress patterns of discriminatory sentencing would also be nice.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:01 PM::<comment>Hey Blue Fish,Yeah, I think the idea of a prompt could be helpful. I've been very impressed with the integrity of the federal judges I've known, and they really do try to get it right. But I think we also need to live with the vicissitudes of the human system that we have. We will never find the ideal judge; one person's ideal judge is another person's tyrant. (Coughenour is a great example: he agonized over the Ressam sentence in a way that I, as a relatively defense-minded person, found admirable. But political conservatives and the US government were VERY angry about his sentencing decision in that case).</comment>

gomer_rs::Friday, February 26, 2016 12:05 AM::<comment>The problem with the prompt reminding judges of biases is that it reinforces said biases.  "If everyone is biased then I'm not a bad person."  What's better is to provide judges with an average and standard deviation.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Thursday, February 25, 2016 9:51 PM::<comment>Hey MattThanks for the comment. The interesting thing about the Sentencing Reform Act is that racial disparity actually got WORSE (gender disparity is a moving target that's had little correlation with federal sentencing policy). There are all sorts of theories about why this is, but in the end, I think it comes down to charging decisions. That is, it comes down to prosecutors cutting whites, parents, women, etc. breaks. The difference is that, when a judge wanted to cut someone a break, they couldn't under the Guidelines. And they still can't under mandatory minimums.What's most fascinating to me is that you SHOULD be right. You'd think that the more detailed the guidelines are, the more equity there would be in sentencing. But it turns out that just the opposite is true. As the Guidelines became more detailed over the 90s and early 2000s, sentencing disparities increased in a correlated fashion.</comment>

Matt::Thursday, February 25, 2016 9:57 PM::<comment>So then maybe prosecutors should get less discretion about when to charge and what charges to bring if they are invalidating changes to sentencing by their bias.There should likely be more work upfront on charging guidelines for prosecutors and then hold them accountable for the racial / gender disparities of their offices.  This was a big point of contention in "The New Jim Crow".  Prosecutors do not even have to release information about who they charge for what until racial bias is proven (which cannot be proven without access to their data).  IT is a catch 22.This could also be drive by racial disparities in access to quality lawyers.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:02 PM::<comment>I mean, I totally agree with you. But I'm married to a public defender, so I may be a bit biased ;-)</comment>

Matt::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:04 PM::<comment>I grew up around poor people in a minority majority area.I saw the effects that prosecutors in the drug war can cause to communities without the resources to fight the war being waged on them.It isn't pretty.Lets be clear, there isn't a war on drugs.  There is a war on poor drug users, mainly of color.</comment>

Sarita La Cubanita::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:07 AM::<comment>The poor never have the advantages of the rich.  That applies not only to law, but to health care, to safety, to nutrition, to education, and to everything.  That's also why everyone has always wanted to be rich.  That never changes.Being rich opens the doors to everything and provides free passes like crazy.</comment>

Shielark::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:36 PM::<comment>Spot ON!  Prosecutors get votes for "throwing the book at" anyone.  The fact that they plump up charges with a lot of bogus "extenuating circumstances" so they can get tough sentencing and be seen as "tough on crime" is a great reason not to allow them to set the agenda.</comment>

ATLaura::Friday, February 26, 2016 7:35 AM::<comment>Federal prosecutors are not elected.  They don't get votes.</comment>

Shielark::Tuesday, March 1, 2016 2:43 AM::<comment>Okay.  Kudos then.  From the newspapers, and the D.A.s, their bosses.</comment>

gomer_rs::Friday, February 26, 2016 12:07 AM::<comment>You can't take charging discretion from prosecutors, our entire criminal justice system depends upon prosecutorial discretion.  We basically must accept that people are flawed and expose their decisions to public scrutiny.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 12:40 AM::<comment>Hi gomer_rsThanks for the comment. Prosecutorial discretion is a huge topic that was too big to tackle in the piece. Candidly, I worry about how our criminal justice system relies on prosecutors somehow overcoming their desire to win cases in order to represent the broader public good (as they supposedly do). I'm a little skeptical of any system that relies on people acting in anything other than self-interest. But the same applies to judges: they are also not all-knowing or all-wise.I think you put your finger on Coughenour's objection to broad prosecutorial discretion, though, in your last sentence. The difference between a judge's decision and a prosecutor's decision is that a judge's decision is always made in public, where a prosecutor's decision is always made in private, and is never subject to public review.It's a balancing act, like everything in our justice system.</comment>

ATLaura::Friday, February 26, 2016 7:21 AM::<comment>This is not entirely true.  We see the prosecutor's decision in the charging documents.  We also see it in the plea deals they strike and the positions they take at sentencing.  All of these things are a matter of public record, filed on the court's docket or stated in open court. Why do you think they are operating in secret or can't be scrutinized for their decisions?</comment>

ATLaura::Friday, February 26, 2016 7:32 AM::<comment>I want to point out also that, since Booker, the sentencing judge has regained some of the power from prosecutors, for good or bad.  There is a downside to this.  The parties have a tougher time negotiating a plea deal when it is harder to predict what the actual sentence might be.  Sometimes the prosecutor and the defendant go into the sentencing hearing thinking they're looking at one sentence and come out realizing the district court judge had a whole nother idea.  The prosecutor and the defendant can only be sure of the minimum and maximum, which can sometimes be as much as 0 to 40 years!  That's a much bigger range than, say, a guidelines range of 235 to 267 months.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 11:37 AM::<comment>A very good point. And something that several judges and prosecutors brought up to me (interestingly, no defense attorneys ever mentioned Booker as a bad thing).The one thing I'd complicate in your answer is that part of the essence of plea deals is the practice of pleading to lesser included charges or pleading to fewer charges than appear in the indictment. So, even under the Guidelines, the range was greater than you suggest, because a standard practice was to dismiss or "plead down" many of those charges, rather than simply applying the Guidelines range for every charge. (I hope that's clear as explained...)Still, Booker was not the unalloyed boon that many defense attorneys make it out to be.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 11:31 AM::<comment>"Operating in secret" may overstate the point, although not by much. As you say, we can see the effects of prosecutorial discretion on the record (in choice of charging instruments and plea deals), but what you can't see are the reasons for those decisions.It's a black box. We can see what goes in (facts, complaint, police report) and what comes out (charges and, probably, a plea deal). But what happens in the box is a mystery.And, importantly, those decisions are never subject to review at any stage. Thanks again for your several astute comments.</comment>

gomer_rs::Friday, February 26, 2016 7:31 AM::<comment>Coughenour's argument, regarding judicial v. prosecutorial discretion, works because it doesn't require saints.  Any system that requires humans to act perfectly is doomed to failure.   Every systematic solution must create space for humans to fail.</comment>

Sosnowski::Monday, February 29, 2016 12:26 AM::<comment>I didn't know anyone expected prosecutors to overcome their desire to win cases; I thought all their professional incentives and accepted ethical assumptions as lawyers explicitly pushed them to get the highest sentence for the least effort. There must be a balancing act there, but I always thought the prescribed role of prosecutors to be essentially predatory, as that of defenders is blindly protective, with the judge and jury responsible for objective justice. Is this not how it works?</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Monday, February 29, 2016 12:56 AM::<comment>Yeah, that's a common conception. But the Supreme Court ruled in Berger v. United States (1935) that  "the United States Attorney is the representative not of an ordinary party to a controversy, but of a sovereignty whose obligation to govern impartially is as important as its obligation to govern at all; and whose interest, therefore, in a criminal prosecution is not that it shall win the case, but that justice shall be done."So the duty of a prosecutor is to represent the interests of justice, not to win cases. And, really, it's hard to imagine a system with a different ethical standard, in which prosecutors are ethically encouraged to charge the innocent.Obviously, we don't have a Panglossian criminal justice system, but prosecutors are held to a tougher standard than defense attorneys, who owe complete loyalty to the client. That's how I read your phrase "blindly protective": it would be UNethical for a defense attorney to "seek justice" or do anything other than represent the interests of the client.Hope that answers your question.</comment>

Matt::Friday, February 26, 2016 2:07 AM::<comment>And that is why there are huge problems with it.</comment>

Sosnowski::Monday, February 29, 2016 12:28 AM::<comment>May I put this to you, too? You seem to know what you're talking about: I didn't know anyone expected prosecutors to overcome their desire to win cases; I thought all their professional incentives and accepted ethical assumptions as lawyers explicitly pushed them to get the highest sentence for the least effort. There must be a balancing act there, but I always thought the prescribed role of prosecutors to be essentially predatory, as that of defenders is blindly protective, with the judge and jury responsible for objective justice. Is this not how it works?</comment>

Matt::Monday, February 29, 2016 1:27 AM::<comment>Prosecutors are supposed to work in the interest of the public as public servants.  The problem is the desire to win causes them to do things like hide exculpatory evidence in order to get a conviction on an innocent man.</comment>

Valyrian Steel::Thursday, February 25, 2016 8:59 PM::<comment>Just when I'm ready to give up on The Atlantic -- an article like this is published.  Kudos to Matthew Van Meter for a fascinating and thought provoking piece.  </comment>

The Wet One::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:18 PM::<comment>Meh. Give them a break. They gotta fill these online pages with something on a daily basis. It's not exactly the easiest thing in the world.And this is why we keep on coming back. That and the sewer running through the comment section. Errr... Maybe not that, but definitely articles like this.BTW, are you on the discussions page? You should be there IMHO. Your comments would be appreciated.</comment>

Valyrian Steel::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:09 AM::<comment>Not only am I not on the discussions page, I didn't know they existed and apparently can't even find them.What/Where are they?</comment>

The Wet One::Friday, February 26, 2016 2:01 AM::<comment>See here:https://disqus.com/home/channe...I've been encouraged to extend the invite as well. Please, join us in discourse and stay awhile.</comment>

Valyrian Steel::Friday, February 26, 2016 2:36 AM::<comment>Thanks.   I'll check it out.  </comment>

The Wet One::Friday, February 26, 2016 4:20 AM::<comment>My pleasure.</comment>

happykt::Thursday, February 25, 2016 9:02 PM::<comment>The problem is the quality, ethics and values of the judge rendering a decision on a case.  Judge Coughenour, who is highlighted in this article seems very smart, and thoughtful, yet I've read newspaper articles of corrupt or idiotic judges doing the wrong thing and not giving out a proper sentence (examples: the judge in Texas who sentences a rich kid for killing or maiming several people probation for affluenza (this is the guy who fled to Mexico with him mom).  I read about another case several years ago about a judge in the Dakota's or Montana who blamed a 13 year old girl for being raped by her teacher (the judge said she enticed him) and let the teacher off with hardly any jail time).  Judges are either appointed or elected and not all are morally or legally qualified to hand down a rational, non-bigoted, and fair judgements like Judge Coughenour. Just look at the judicial bias on the US Supreme Court! There are no easy answers to this conundrum.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Thursday, February 25, 2016 9:57 PM::<comment>Hey, happyktThanks for the comment. I totally agree. What really gets me about this issue is just what you brought up: we'd love to have an all-knowing, all-wise arbiter. But that being doesn't exist in our court system. When Judge Coughenour told me that "you've got to trust the person making the decision," he wasn't speaking idly. That's an actual conundrum for all the reasons you laid out so nicely.I think it's a really key issue to our system of justice. Whom do we as a society trust to mete out punishment? How much "accountability" should that person have?</comment>

Matt::Thursday, February 25, 2016 9:59 PM::<comment>Yeah the article presupposed judges are not a combination of jaded, corrupt, and racist / otherwise biased..I'm not sure how well that presupposition actually applies.</comment>

The Wet One::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:24 PM::<comment>This is true.</comment>

Jeffn::Friday, February 26, 2016 12:17 AM::<comment>well said. One of the things that also influences judges, fairly or unfairly, is the cost to the criminal over and above the sentence.On the one hand, a $100 speeding ticket is nothing to a rich man, but devastating to a poor man, so he might be inclined to use jail on a rich repeat offender.On the other, a white collar criminal typically loses it all when busted and convicted- job, savings, family, house, etc. By the time sentencing rolls around around he may have suffered quite a bit. A gang member, however, may not have suffered anything and, in fact, could have his reputation in his business enhanced</comment>

Roller Girl::Friday, February 26, 2016 3:30 AM::<comment>I am glad you called it a business.  It is ruthless in its retribution. It has negatively effected the area where I was raised.  While sentencing is important; it is evaluates the effect, the consequence of drug crime. I hope I am not too far off topic. There is a connection between poverty , black markets, and sentencing or justice.  we could take the  "black" out of markets, then maybe the violence would lessen.  IMO,  the question is who would bear the cost from this arrangement- taking the profit out of these markets?  </comment>

RichardOwens::Friday, February 26, 2016 2:26 AM::<comment>The rape case caused such an outcry the perp got re-sentenced harsher.</comment>

Troll_in_Training::Thursday, February 25, 2016 9:02 PM::<comment>This is the sort of person we need on the bench.  Judges make irreversible decisions about people's lives and must never lose their humility about what they are doing.</comment>

Paris Hilton::Thursday, February 25, 2016 9:13 PM::<comment>Here in red, backward Texas we let juries do the sentencing (unless it's a bench trial).  There are minimums and maximums for offenses, but those mins and maxes leave the jury a lot of wiggle room.  What makes jury sentencing better than judge sentencing is that there are many SCOTUS decisions guaranteeing a fair, impartial jury.  It makes no sense to essentially throw those guarantees away when the trial transitions from guilt/innocence to sentencing.  The SCOTUS hasn't issued anywhere near the number of opinions on judges to guarantee a fair sentencing.  Basically, let juries do sentencing in the federal system, get rid of the USSG, and then you'd have more equitable sentences.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:08 PM::<comment>Thanks for the comment. I have come to agree with you.And yeah, state court is an entirely different beast for all sorts of reasons. I've done a lot of reporting in local courts in the Bronx, and I think the rules of the game are different for all sorts of reasons. For one thing, state courts are hugely idiosyncratic by jurisdiction in a way that federal courts are not. And, frankly, the quality of lawyering and judging is.... shall we say, more uneven.</comment>

mburke73::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:06 PM::<comment>I agree--state and local courts seem far more idiosyncratic than federal ones do--hundreds, thousands of jurisdictions make for some oddball decisions--they are not bound by these sentencing guidelines, so far as I know--are they bound by the Booker decision? I agree with the commenters who said this is a remarkable article--I've been subscribing to the Atlantic since 1974 and find this to be the kind of writing I've missed the last few years. Thanks!</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 5:05 AM::<comment>Hey thanks for the compliment. That means a lot.To answer your question: no, Booker does not apply to state courts. There's one simple reason for this: the Sentencing Reform Act also didn't apply to state courts. A few states have guideline-like policies (indeed, the SRA was based on state initiatives), but they vary as much as anything does state-by-state.If you're interested in the nitty-gritty, here's a link to the National Center for State Courts booklet on guidelines. It's not worth reading in detail, but the overview is pretty good. http://www.ncsc.org/~/media/Mi...</comment>

mburke73::Friday, February 26, 2016 9:26 PM::<comment>Thanks for the link--here in St Louis, we just had a minor scandal over sentencing of the son of a politically connected man who got the county police chief and the county executive to write  letters to the judge testifying to the son's good character--made it seem like a quid pro quo--and the sentence given seemed lighter than those for others who'd committed a similar crime. http://www.stltoday.com/news/l...</comment>

MZale::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:55 PM::<comment>Two points germane to this.  First, federal judges are almost universally better qualified and vetted than Texas (or any other, for that matter) state judges.  Second, I'm skeptical that Texas no longer has certain mandatory minimums that take the sentencing decision out of the jury's hands.  When did that change?  After all, it's the handcuffs placed on the decision makers that's really the problem in most systems - and the thing to address first.</comment>

Paris Hilton::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:10 PM::<comment>Every crime in every jurisdiction has a mandatory minimum and a maximum.  There are certain crimes that only a judge can issue deferred adjudication on, but DA isn't jail/prison time.  That works out in a defendant's favor.And I wouldn't go making blanket statements about federal judges vs. state judges.  There are some scoundrels on state benches, but there are some hacks on federal benches as well.  And even if your statement were true, it makes relying on the jury to sentence that much more important.</comment>

PotatoPealer::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:04 PM::<comment>Yeah, jurors are never racist.  That is why no one is voting for Trump.</comment>

Paris Hilton::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:07 PM::<comment>Of course they are, and that's why we have many SCOTUS opinions addressing those harms.  What's worse, two racist jurors on a 12 person panel, or one racist judge who doesn't have to answer to anyone?</comment>

Sarita La Cubanita::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:14 AM::<comment>Exactly!</comment>

Sarita La Cubanita::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:13 AM::<comment>The principle of juries is highly democratic.  There was a time when the king ruled over everything, and determined the fate of anyone charged with anything (the gallows, or prison, or freedom).  The concept of juries provided fairness not present when monarchies, oligarchies, and so on were the ones which determined that fate.  Can juries be biased?  Sure they can, but the purpose of voir dire is to attempt to eliminate some of that.There will never be perfect trials.  Ever.</comment>

aNYagenda::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:35 PM::<comment>I dont care for bikers.(But I'm totally into Biker chicks!)</comment>

DC Reade::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:37 PM::<comment>Read Seth Ferranti some time. He knows the deal. He's seen it from the inside. http://www.vice.com/author/set...</comment>

aNYagenda::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:24 PM::<comment>I'm totally into seth ferrenti,and the world learned an important lesson about freedom,when they melted him.</comment>

Thackery::Thursday, February 25, 2016 10:48 PM::<comment>There is an irony in the recent Malheur bird refuge invasion. The irony comes from the fact that the two ranchers who were sent back to prison for arson on federal land were given a lighter sentence by a judge who then had his sentence reviewed by another judge. That judge imposed the 5 yr mandatory minimum required by the law passed by republicans in the Congress in the late 90's. They GOP did this because they said judges were too liberal and their sentences weren't just. To me, that only shows that politicians insist that everyone who doesn't believe the same way they do are somehow incompetent. I don't agree, but I did enjoy the irony of the basis of the recent dust up in Oregon.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:46 PM::<comment>Yeah, totally ironic. I mean, ideological consistency was not a hallmark of that standoff, but this was almost too good.</comment>

RichardOwens::Friday, February 26, 2016 2:23 AM::<comment>Do you think they will get their "right to bear arms" back again?Protesters with abundant weaponry and ammo are more apt to convince others to go along with what ever they might want.I feel some vengeance myself, but I don't think it is a good feeling in these matters.</comment>

Lev Bronshtein::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:11 PM::<comment>All these sentencing guidelines came about because liberal judges did the liberal thing:  went easy on criminals, pervasively.  In the rising-crime era, people got sick of it, so they were on board with harsh sentencing baselines.I was part of the California recall of 1986, when Californians recalled three judges off the State Supreme Court (including the Chief Justice), because they were reflexively overturning death sentences (that is, they were subverting justice).  We ran those criminal-lovers out of town on a rail!People were just sick of crime and criminals getting off easy.  Start going easy again, and there will be blowback.</comment>

Biggus Disqus::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:33 PM::<comment>Sieg Heil!</comment>

Lev Bronshtein::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:44 PM::<comment>Here come the Nazis.</comment>

ATLaura::Friday, February 26, 2016 7:14 AM::<comment>I don't think so.  It had more to do with the fact that different judges could impose extremely different sentences on two defendants who had committed the same crime and had essentially the same background and aggravating and mitigating circumstances.  The Sentencing Guidelines tried to provide a framework that would produce more consistency and predictability in sentences among like defendants.Your recall of state court judges had nothing to do the federal sentencing reform.</comment>

The Wet One::Thursday, February 25, 2016 11:16 PM::<comment>Well that certainly is interesting.This bit:"For a century and a half, judges wielded this power with essentially unfettered discretion, but the system had drawbacks. Judges had no governing body, and they approached sentencing differently: Some saw incarceration as rehabilitative, while others saw it as retribution, or as a deterrent, or as a way to segregate dangerous people from society. And judges were not immune to the vicissitudes of public opinion. The potential for abuse of power was patent. Sentencing decisions were not even subject to a higher court’s review."Really captures it all. I wasn't aware that stare decisis didn't apply to sentencing (maybe that's wrong, but that's what it sounds like) and that there was no legislative guideline historically on what punishments judges should meet out. That's very different from how Canada's Criminal Code has operated for some time (I'm not sure about always, but for some time in any event). The Code gives judges an upper limit and a small number of mandatory sentences. Judicial decisions on sentencing are subject to stare decisis, (similar facts of crimes result in similar sentences, whereas worse instances of the same crime or repeat offenders or whathaveyou, get longer sentences). I.e. judges still judge here, and aren't free to do whatever they want (as sentences are subject to appeal) with respect to sentencing.With this background, I understand a bit better how U.S. sentencing guidelines came about. I didn't know this before.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 4:27 AM::<comment>Hey, glad I could help explain. Vis-a-vis stare decisis, that's not precisely what was at stake. (Sentences are not part of the "decision," and so are not part of the doctrine of stare decisis).  The debate here was about what constitutes "reviewable error" on the part of a sentencing judge. Until the Sentencing Reform Act, as I understand the history, an appeals court could not overturn a judge's sentence simply because it was too harsh or too lenient. There needed to be some other "error" for that decision to be reviewable. I hope that helps to clarify, rather than muddle!</comment>

The Wet One::Friday, February 26, 2016 6:33 AM::<comment>Thanks for the reply and for the excellent article. The reply helps clarify things a bit further.</comment>

MmeZeeZee::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:07 AM::<comment>"The public wants an ideal arbiter: just, wise, and knowing. But while questing for that mythical, paternal figure who will make all the right decisions, it’s easy to become disillusioned with the inconsistency and fallibility of human beings."This is a great summary of our whole system. Thank you for this article. Well done.</comment>

KevinWarren::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:08 AM::<comment>Even the best of men are just men.</comment>

KevinWarren::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:09 AM::<comment>men in the general human sense.  women judges are just as fallible as men</comment>

Guyzer::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:10 AM::<comment>only a dumb lefty would have to qualify that</comment>

KevinWarren::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:15 AM::<comment>It's there for the lefties</comment>

Guyzer::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:19 AM::<comment>oh</comment>

KevinWarren::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:07 AM::<comment>I'm not sure using a man convicted of trying to blow up a major airport and kill a massive number of innocent people is a great example to use when arguing for leniency in sentencing guidelines.  I have little compassion for this man as he was willing and took steps to mass murder.How about we look at mandatory sentences for non violent crimes?  Surely there's somebody in prison today that's been there for years and years for possession or trafficking. Or maybe that bank robber guy if he didn't use a gun or hurt anybody.</comment>

Troll_in_Training::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:54 AM::<comment>I was about to say the same thing regarding the child molester.  You are not going to find many likeable sympathetic people facing multi-decade federal prison sentences.  However, someone needs to be able to decide that 20 years is appropriate and 40 is excessive.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 5:25 AM::<comment>Hi Kevin. Yeah, that was exactly why I thought Ressam was such a good test of this idea of the limits of judicial discretion. It's easy for (almost) everyone to agree on giving leniency to someone whose crime (or attempted crime, in this case) is less horrific. The better test is a crime we can all agree is horrific and repugnant.</comment>

AddictionMyth::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:08 AM::<comment>"overrun by drugs and drug violence" - More like the war on drugs.  These problems will mostly evaporate with decriminalization. The problem is that many people are dependent upon the crime-and-punishment industrial complex so they exaggerate and even abet the strife.  The irony is that many of the people who protest these injustices now come from the groups that originally promoted them: right-wing ranchers protesting mandatory minimums and inner city black leaders protesting the crack disparity.  Now they are going after 'human traffacking' and 'campus rape crisis epidemic' and whatever else they can think up.</comment>

Guyzer::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:21 AM::<comment>"crime-and-punishment industrial complex" .......... LOL</comment>

Guyzer::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:09 AM::<comment>The best way to avoid federal sentencing guidelines is to not be a scumbag criminal in the first place.</comment>

duryurg::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:27 AM::<comment>My, how disgustingly puritanical.</comment>

KevinWarren::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:13 AM::<comment>Is it time to reconsider three strikes?</comment>

dave in texas::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:53 AM::<comment>Absolutely. I read an article recently that told the story of a man who had gotten busted a couple of times for, if I recall correctly, weed possession as a young man, but who had straightened out and was a pillar of the community, business owner, etc. Many years after his early arrests, his business partner made off with all the money from the company's bank accounts and he unknowingly wrote a couple of checks that bounced. I think you know the rest. He was convicted and sentenced to life in prison.Now that's admittedly an extreme case, but given that there are hundreds of thousands of people in prison for what we now see as minor drug offenses, it stands to reason that the potential for this kind of travesty is extremely high. I have no problem with some kind of sentence multiplier for people with several violent crimes, but in my opinion, a life sentence for a nonviolent offender is completely beyond the pale.</comment>

Troll_in_Training::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:56 AM::<comment>Sure.  We absolutely need to lock away the repeat criminals for a much longer time than the first timers. 3 strikes is a very crude way to do that.</comment>

ATLaura::Friday, February 26, 2016 6:47 AM::<comment>The Supreme Court already is.  They have narrowed what is considered a "strike."</comment>

Chillywilly::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:31 AM::<comment>Initial sentencing reform is but one piece of the criminal justice system. In addition, early release program reform should be a part of the discussion. An indifferent, long sentence can be cured by multiple means. The length of time a convicted criminal spends in prison does not have to begin and end with a judge or jurist.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 5:31 AM::<comment>Thanks for reading. One fascinating aspect of the Sentencing Reform Act is that it eliminated parole for federal inmates. There is no early release program for federal prison; only a "good time credit," which earns you a little time off for good behavior. Parole is a BIG part of the conversation in state courts, but it hasn't been a part of the federal system since 1984.</comment>

ATLaura::Friday, February 26, 2016 6:46 AM::<comment>Yes, this is a good point.  The federal system has no parole.  You will do almost all of a federal sentence. </comment>

duryurg::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:43 AM::<comment>To me, the biggest and most illuminating point of the article was the level of obscurity and impunity in which prosecutors operate. That topic really merits its own piece. Anything that has the level of privilege to operate so forcefully behind closed doors is something to be feared.I also applaud judge Coughenour for having the backbone to actually visit prisons and see for himself the conditions and stretch of time that their sentences render. I personally wouldn't mind if that were required of all judges and prosecutors, most of whom likely never have to confront their decisions in such a way.</comment>

The Wet One::Friday, February 26, 2016 1:57 AM::<comment>I like this judge.Unlike me, he's unwilling to write off humanity in one swift stroke of extreme justice. Me, I'd kill them all (all humans lest you think you'd escape my wrath) and let whatever god or gods they preferred in life, sort them out. Gazing out across the corrupted landscape of the human world, I see no one that is righteous and deserving of life. Not even one.</comment>

AddictionMyth::Friday, February 26, 2016 2:10 AM::<comment>Come to think of it I haven't seen any rainbows lately....</comment>

JP::Friday, February 26, 2016 3:12 AM::<comment>I think Nancy Gertner was referencing "Gray's Anatomy" (the textbook), not "Grey's Anatomy" (the TV show). I was understandably confused by the argument brought forward by this point - one letter drastically changes the meaning here.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 4:28 AM::<comment>Good catch, thanks!</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Saturday, February 27, 2016 12:33 AM::<comment>Fixed. Really appreciate your sharp eye.</comment>

ATLaura::Friday, February 26, 2016 6:42 AM::<comment>I think the author could have done a little more background on Booker and its effects on sentencing before writing an entire article about one district court judge's beef with the sentencing guidelines.  Perhaps look at the ten years of sentencing statistics post Booker to see how district court judges sentence and how appellate courts review those sentences, which I'm pretty sure the Sentencing Commission keeps.  Booker was a sea change.  I think the statistics would show that sentencing reform advocates need to focus their attention elsewhere now that the guidelines are merely advisory.  Mandatory minimums coupled with prosecutorial charging discretion has had a lot more to do with filling our federal prisons than the sentencing guidelines, which even now play a valuable role (albeit a much smaller one) in making sure judges' sentences don't become subject to mere whims and arbitrariness.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Friday, February 26, 2016 11:25 AM::<comment>Hi, thanks for all your astute comments. Part of what got me initially interested in this topic is that the situation post-Booker is unsettled. As you point out, the mandatory minimums are far more influential now; the Guidelines are past. That's totally what I thought when I started reporting this piece.... But, according to the US Sentencing Commission (whose data I do not take completely at face value, but they're the best we have) most judges have NOT deviated significantly from the Guidelines post-Booker. And our federal prison population continues to grow faster than before, even if you control for people sentenced under mandatory minimums. There are all kinds of theories about why, but for some reason the Guidelines seem as prevalent as ever.</comment>

ATLaura::Tuesday, March 1, 2016 8:39 AM::<comment>Hi Matthew, if I look at the Sentencing Commission's 2014 statistics from their website, 46% of defendants were sentenced within the guideline range, while just shy of 52% were sentenced BELOW the guideline range, either as a result of a departure or a variance, or both.  Surprisingly, only 2.2% of defendants received a sentence above the guideline range, so there does not appear to be a tendency for "hanging judges" to impose harsher sentences, as another commenter suggested.  Not sure where you're getting your data from, but the Commission's 2014 statistics suggest judges are willing to go below the guideline range when they think it's appropriate to do so.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Wednesday, March 2, 2016 3:41 AM::<comment>Hey, yeah that's totally what I thought when I started reporting this piece. Forty-six percent seems really low, right? Now, you may well know more about this than I do, but here's how I ended up conceptualizing the issue: First, it's instructive to dig in a bit to the Sentencing Commission's archive, especially the 2005 Annual Report (linked below), which captures Guidelines application immediately pre- and post-Booker. Guidelines compliance pre-Booker was about 70%, post-Booker was about 61%. Then I wondered where that 9% change came from. Did it come from all judges exercising roughly 9% more discretion, or what? It turns out that, if you look at the reports by district for that year, the change was concentrated almost completely in a few jurisdictions (especially small jurisdictions, like Vermont and Idaho). I suspect (and I can only suspect--the USSC refused to give me judge-by-judge data, although they have it) that, even within those jurisdictions, the change was concentrated in a few judges who, like Coughenour, were just waiting for the opportunity to flout the Guidelines. Each year, the national compliance figure has declined, but that change has continued to be concentrated in a few judges: most judges are very compliant (around 70% within guidelines, like before Booker). A small but growing number are spectacularly non-compliant. I hinted at this a bit in my paragraph about whether these discrepancies are in fact evidence of the very discretion Coughenour wants. So you're right that compliance was 46% in FY 2014, but I think the granular information tells a subtle story about why that is. I may have overstated that case in my above comment, though, so you were right to take issue with my description. The Guidelines have definitely decreased in importance over time. Just not as much as it seems on first glance.As for upward departures, those have always been exceedingly rare. I suspect they are rare because (and here's perhaps where I show my ideological hand) the Guidelines ranges are SO high already that it would take a very harsh judge indeed to depart up.http://www.ussc.gov/sites/defa...</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Wednesday, March 2, 2016 3:48 AM::<comment>Another thing that bears mentioning is that judges are still required to calculate the Guidelines on the record and use them as a baseline, which imparts a subtle upward pressure on sentences. Sentences have not precipitously declined since Booker.The Guidelines are also used as the standard of appellate review. When the 9th Circuit overturned Coughenour's second sentencing of Ressam (which was post-Booker), it was for an "abuse of discretion" because his sentence was so far below the prescribed range, and the Guidelines are still presumptively fair.</comment>

Tom_Tildrum::Friday, February 26, 2016 8:07 AM::<comment>Discretion is a two-way street. For every Coughenor who wants to impose lighter sentences, there's going to be a hanging judge who wants to be harsher. It would be interesting to pin Van Meter down as to whether his real goal is discretion or just leniency.</comment>

Matthew Van Meter::Saturday, February 27, 2016 12:31 AM::<comment>Hi Tom. Thanks for the comment. When you said "his real goal," did you mean my goal or Coughenour's?If the former, I don't really have a goal. I don't pretend to be unbiased (I'm pretty defense-minded), but I was drawn to this issue because I'm fascinated by the questions raised by this issue, questions that are fundamental to how we administer justice: Who decides what an appropriate sentence is? What is the goal of a prison sentence? Whom do we trust to make those determinations?If the latter, I think Coughenour takes his role as sentencer very seriously. He agonizes over every decision, and he is not always on the side of "leniency." If his sentences sometimes seem lenient, I think he'd say that it's because the baseline sentences have become so absurdly long under the Guidelines.Hope that answers your question.</comment>

Midwest::Friday, February 26, 2016 8:27 AM::<comment>Prosecutors have unlimited discretion, stack charges, abuse the conspiracy rules of evidence and lean on the Guidelines to nail down plea agreements. Less than 10% of federal cases go to trial.  Make prosecutors charging decisions subject to review AND ditch the Guidelines. </comment>

dave::Saturday, February 27, 2016 2:30 AM::<comment>Sadly, the alternative appears to be that the politically connected; the rich; and the physically attractive will receive lighter sentences than the norm and the poor and minorities harsher sentences.Judges, who are subjected to 24/7 flattery by lawyers, frequently lose sight of their fallibility and biases.</comment>

