Headline::::
Our fixation with maths doesn’t add up




DateTime::::2016-03-10T06:00:09+0000



<p><span class="drop-cap"><span class="drop-cap__inner">W</span></span>ho will win the Varkey Foundation’s million-dollar “best teacher” prize this week in Dubai? Hot favourite is Britain’s star maths teacher, <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://www.youtube.com/user/HEGARTYMATHS/videos">Colin Hegarty, whose videos are followed by a million viewers worldwide</a>. <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/20/meet-the-internet-maths-guru-who-could-become-the-next-million-dollar-teacher">Hegarty has been hailed as the great hope for British maths</a>.</p>

<p>Like much of the public realm, British maths is “in crisis”. The country is languishing alongside America way down every league table. Evidence of this was cited in <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/07/a-fifth-of-uk-adults-have-forgotten-how-to-do-fractions-or-percentages-mathematics-english-science">a new poll from YouGov</a>, measuring the public’s knowledge of maths, science and English. In maths, roughly a third of those surveyed had no idea how to calculate a mode, a median, a “line of best fit” or the area of a circle.</p>

<p>I seriously doubt this poll, since it implies that two-thirds did know the answers. All on whom I tested it failed, including myself. Nor could they see the point. With one voice they replied: “That’s the sort of thing you learned at school.” So what is the point? It merely ensures that many pupils, like the bright child of a friend of mine with maths blindness, have their schooling undermined by the government’s fixation with maths.</p>

<p>There is nothing, except religion, as conservative as a school curriculum. It is drenched in archaic prejudice and vested interest. When the medieval church banned geography as an offence against the Bible, what had been the queen of the sciences never recovered. Instead Latin dominated the “grammar” curriculum into the 20th century, to the expense of all science. Today maths is the new Latin.</p>

<p>Science at least improved. In 1988 Thatcher hailed a “dash for science” to halt the decline in young people opting for science subjects. It failed completely. Then in 2006 a radical new GCSE syllabus dragged school science away from test tubes and Bunsen burners towards everyday life, to pollution, global warming, additives, health and diet. Since then the reactionaries have turned to maths as the talisman of educational success. It is in maths that we must beat the Chinese, the Singaporeans and the Finns. <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-25187997">Pisa league tables of “top nations” are pored over</a>. Maths teachers are paid more, have their loans written off, are entered for global prizes. No one dares mention the calculator.</p>

<p>Any league table that has China at the top, Britain at 26th and America at 36th tells me something more important than merely who is good at maths. If the US and Britain – among the most vigorous economies and most successful at science – are so bad at maths, it suggests their young people are applying themselves to something more useful. Chinese students are rushing to British and US universities to join them.</p>

<p>No one would argue that pupils should not be able to add, subtract and multiply. But I studied higher maths, from calculus to number theory, and have forgotten the lot. All the maths I have needed comes from <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Allen_Paulos">John Allen Paulos’s timeless manual, Innumeracy</a>. It is mostly how to understand proportion and risk, and tell when a statistician is trying to con you.</p>

<p>I agree with the great <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.famous-mathematicians.com/g-h-hardy/">mathematician GH Hardy,</a> who accepted that higher maths was without practical application. It was rather a matter of intellectual stimulus and beauty. A new book by <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://mathematicswithoutapologies.wordpress.com/">Michael Harris, Mathematics Without Apologies</a>, goes to the extremes of this stimulus, to the categorical ladder, incompleteness theory and the <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/feb/12/black-scholes-equation-credit-crunch">Black-Scholes equation</a>, used to assess financial derivatives. It ends in the “inconsistency nightmare”, that nought might possibly equal one.</p>

<p>We accept the need for maths in advanced physics and in computing algorithms, much as we accept Greek for archaeology and Anglo-Saxon for early literature. The “mathematics of finance” school at Columbia University is lavishly sponsored by Wall Street firms, for good reason. But that does not mean every primary pupil must spend hours, indeed years, trying to learn equations and πr<sup>2</sup>, which they soon forget through disuse. Maths is for specialists, so why instil arithmophobia in the rest?</p>

<p> <span>Related: </span><a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/feb/12/black-scholes-equation-credit-crunch">The mathematical equation that caused the banks to crash</a> </p>

<p>Charge the maths lobby with the uselessness of its subject and the answer is a mix of chauvinism and vacuity. Maths must be taught if we are to beat the Chinese (at maths). Or it falls back on primitivism, that maths “trains the mind”. So does learning the Qur’an and reciting Latin verbs.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, the curriculum systematically denies pupils what might be of real use to them and society. There is no “need” for more mathematicians. The nation needs, and therefore pays most for, more executives, accountants, salesmen, designers and creative thinkers.</p>

<p>At the very least, today’s pupils should go into the world with a knowledge of their history and geography, their environment, the working of their bodies, the upbringing of children, law, money, the economy and civil rights.</p>

<p>This is in addition to self-confidence, emotional intelligence and the culture of the English imagination. All are crowded out by a political obsession with maths.</p>

<p>The reason is depressingly clear. Maths is merely an easy subject to measure, nationally and internationally. It thus facilitates the bureaucratic craving for targetry and control. The prominence of maths in the curriculum is education’s version of Orwell’s imaginary boot, “stamping on your face … forever”.</p>




Author::::shibata1
DateTime::::2016-03-12T08:38:13Z
Well said.



Author::::HorseCart
DateTime::::2016-03-12T08:34:12Z
Oh, Simon Jenkins being a moderate again. When is that boy ever going to be an extremist anything, other than an extreme opinion narcissist? Imagine trying to teach him the meaning of love, instead of just maths? He could have ended up being an NHS junior doctor on strike, instead of just an economist who loves to write.



Author::::freelancelawrence
DateTime::::2016-03-12T08:00:37Z
"The nation needs, and therefore pays most for, more executives, accountants, salesmen, designers and creative thinkers."



Author::::iptragos
DateTime::::2016-03-12T03:22:56Z
--- Or it falls back on primitivism, that maths “trains the mind”. So does learning the Qur’an and reciting Latin verbs. ---



Author::::basiljidefadipe
DateTime::::2016-03-12T02:05:49Z
Maths is useful to incisive thinking but not indispensable to it. 



Author::::northnortheast
DateTime::::2016-03-12T00:46:11Z
Guardian journo doesn't like maths and wants more focus on soft subjects.



Author::::domeus
DateTime::::2016-03-11T23:01:12Z
Belated thanks Darkers. One really learns about money when one comes to use it. Dealing with coins etc. may soon be not required as joeknowsbest pointed out. Education changes with technology. Spending hours learning about vulgar fractions is boring and a waste of time. As for "risk" I know a fellow who hated vulgar fractions and all that goes with them when he was at school but who knows exactly the difference in risk and reward when dealing with odds of 11/10 and 5/4 on the favourite in the 2.30 at Cheltenham! To help us cope with the biased statistics and news "thrown at us" day after day by the government and corporate press we need a much broader and less controlled education than the establishment will allow. Maths would have a minor role I think that Michael Faraday learned more in his father`s forge than he did from his maths teacher. But Einstein went to pure mathematicians to help him solve his geometry problems! Very best wishes.



Author::::mathsmike
DateTime::::2016-03-11T20:24:33Z
Some re-hashing of previous articles here too!



Author::::staxis01
DateTime::::2016-03-11T19:32:53Z
Not entirely. The vast majority of physics undergraduates will have studied A Level maths where they will have learnt some calculus.



Author::::HarryTheHorse
DateTime::::2016-03-11T19:31:18Z
But the Left thrive on gathering the votes from the ill educated



Author::::HarryTheHorse
DateTime::::2016-03-11T19:24:44Z
Since he read PPE, he most certainly did not learn "higher" mathematics . Sorry but a bit of calculus at A level is not remotely higher mathematics. Jenkins is full of shit



Author::::Pavan Patel
DateTime::::2016-03-11T19:22:32Z
Yeah! Forget about inspiring students to pursue engineering and science degrees! The only thing that matters is the pupils' feelings!



Author::::amarita
DateTime::::2016-03-11T19:17:25Z
the obvious conslusion to draw is that Simon Jenkins was taught mathematics very badly (to be fair, like the vast majority of pupils). if he had been taught properly then - for a start - he would never be tempted to ask "what's the point?"



Author::::OxfordFan
DateTime::::2016-03-11T19:11:08Z
Maths is beautiful for those who can travel that path but it should never be forced upon those whose path it is not.



Author::::Jonathan Thorpe
DateTime::::2016-03-11T18:58:08Z
The reason maths is so fundamental is that it is a tool not a science, and is used everywhere. In physics, engineering, chemistry, ecology, genetics, economics, computing, algorithms, social sciences and many more. Essentially, in anything remotely sciency, if you know the maths, learning the rest is a walk-through. Reducing maths to 'targetry and control' without any mention of its beauty and beneficial applications is so absurd and so revealing of the depth of your ignorance I will not express my opinion for it is sure to be moderated out.



Author::::OxfordFan
DateTime::::2016-03-11T18:45:56Z
Have they changed the photo since you posted this? It shows a right-angled triangle now.



Author::::OxfordFan
DateTime::::2016-03-11T18:33:42Z
biology...is not science



Author::::OxfordFan
DateTime::::2016-03-11T18:29:26Z
...and education is merely about the student's value to employers. What a horrible world.



Author::::OxfordFan
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:57:53Z
Can someone who actually knows Simon just tell him of the content of the comments on his yearly Maths 'articles' - every year he writes the same, ill-informed rubbish; every year people try to educate him/ tell him that he is being a very silly boy; every year he refuses to learn from those who know better and continues to do the same thing. Can the Guardian please stop the poor boy from embarrassing himself in future and ban him from writing about Maths or, preferably, send him for some private tuition.



Author::::emiranda
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:42:16Z
...produce people who hate mathematics it can control them much easier, and can lie to them about global warming and fossil fuels and economics and in and on and thereby enrich their donors while impoverishing the rest of us, economically and intellectually.



Author::::OxfordFan
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:40:36Z
Simon is one of the few columnists worth reading in the Guardian.



Author::::Geoff Sandham
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:37:08Z
I think this article misses the point that if you don't understand a fundamental subject like maths you can't begin to understand its possibility. You might as well just sit by and accept its all just magic. Further more I think what is really sad is that this article fails to touch on the fundamental deficite in our education which is the gap between State sector and the Private. Clearly class size and staff motivation are critical when it comes to what can be taught effectively. That is the real issue ! Our universities continue to do well because the are fed by a well resourced private education sector who are able to educate and coach more closely. Yet on a national level this is not simple not the case. Perhaps Simon Jenkins would do well to conduct a more indepth demographic analysis using the mathmatical skills he claims to have aquired. While surviving on the success of a minority may keep our universities afloat for a while I strongly doubt it bodes well for the Nation.



Author::::iainj
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:36:53Z
By designer I meant graphic designer... I think the people designing jet engines would probably be insulted if you called them designers!



Author::::KingOfNothing
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:27:00Z
Yup! A workforce like China's is a potent force, for as long as they are 'willing' to be controlled and told how to think.



Author::::emiranda
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:21:40Z
... ah, back again :-)



Author::::OxfordFan
DateTime::::2016-03-11T17:18:55Z
Simon Jenkins yet again provides a perfect example of the Dunning–Kruger effect.



Author::::gazza1312
DateTime::::2016-03-11T16:43:54Z
There is some common sense in this article, not everyone will use or need more than simple maths in their everyday lives. Were this to be recognised in school and exams some children could spend less time grappling with something they cannot grasp (and which leaves them feeling like a failure) and more time with subjects they can excel in.



Author::::emiranda
DateTime::::2016-03-11T16:36:27Z
...I reached the limit of the size of a comment, and so...



Author::::thermo dynamics
DateTime::::2016-03-11T16:33:48Z
"We accept the need for maths in advanced physics and in computing algorithms, much as we accept Greek for archaeology and Anglo-Saxon for early literature. "



Author::::Dave1London
DateTime::::2016-03-11T16:21:15Z
"of a stroke" --> "or a stroke"



Author::::Dave1London
DateTime::::2016-03-11T16:19:56Z
"But I studied higher maths, from calculus to number theory, and have forgotten the lot."



Author::::RichM49
DateTime::::2016-03-11T16:14:40Z
Much of the problem with Mathematics is that it is expressed in a very formal language with a strict grammatical structure and precise application of logic. Unfortunately for most people their first encounter with grammar (not to be confused with spelling) and logic is via English. I believe a sound understanding of the grammatical underpinning of English ( or any other langauge) is key to developing an understanding of mathematics and the language of mathematics but the teaching of this is weak. Perhaps the reason that other countries such as China are ahead of us in Mathematics teaching lies in the structure of their language. We can distinquish between English in a social context and Academic English which can be taught formally following the principles of Applied Linquistics as was tried in Solihull some years ago.



Author::::emiranda
DateTime::::2016-03-11T15:38:01Z
Dear Simon,



Author::::BoredBoredBored
DateTime::::2016-03-11T14:44:42Z
I wouldn't disagree with that at all.



Author::::jonathan bean
DateTime::::2016-03-11T14:40:37Z
I'm not sure we should be judging which subjects to teach children based on which provide the best banter down the pub.



Author::::SonofaBliar
DateTime::::2016-03-11T13:24:17Z
GCSE physics seems to be having a good go at this!



Author::::Dogsbody2001
DateTime::::2016-03-11T13:12:53Z
Simon probably thinks that because he, Valenti, and many of the other CIF regulars have managed to make a decent living despite (or perhaps because of </>) the fact that they're innumerate, then this is good for everyone. 



Author::::Dogsbody2001
DateTime::::2016-03-11T12:58:02Z
True, it is possible to know how to calculate mean, mode and median without being able to interpret stats.



Author::::richardblogger
DateTime::::2016-03-11T12:42:27Z
There is a truism that "Simon Jenkins is wrong about everything" and this article proves it. Maths is the language of science, without maths you do not have science. Is Jenkins saying that science should only be for the elitist few that he would allow to learn maths?



Author::::FelixMyIcecream
DateTime::::2016-03-11T12:34:22Z
How about Quantum Statistical Mechanics ?



Author::::Nick Rawle
DateTime::::2016-03-11T12:31:36Z
If you were "Good at maths" you could get three O levels for the price of one: Maths, Further Maths and Statistics; If you were good at any other subject, there were no options to pick up extra qualifications in those areas, (No "Further French" or "Extra Chemistry") and I am not sure there are yet. Adding additional languages or sciences would always be impossible unless you dropped something else, but the extra maths classes never clashed with anything - because... Why? Is doing an O Level in statistics MUCH more important than learning German or Spanish or Russian?



Author::::leodensian
DateTime::::2016-03-11T12:15:14Z
Get rid of English Literature first. No subject could be a bigger waste of time than that.



Author::::Deviantinc
DateTime::::2016-03-11T11:34:59Z
WTF even is a polynomial?



Author::::Deviantinc
DateTime::::2016-03-11T11:24:00Z
I don't think I'm saying every branch of maths will be useful to everyone and every job. But I do think that in any job or for any person there is a branch of maths that would be useful if they understood it enough to be able to apply it. But you cannot know in advance which branch that will be, so it is advisable to teach a broad range of maths. You may not have had to factorise a quadratic, but some people might need to. And furthermore, factorising a quadratic isn't really a skill useful in itself, but is a very useful for learning other formula rearranging techniques, that someone may need to use when trying to apply a formula someone else has produced in a non-standard way. 



Author::::twtone
DateTime::::2016-03-11T11:17:27Z
Exactly, I teach vocational maths and its very practical for builders and electricians that want to suceed and be masters of their trades. Drop maths and you produce the cowboys.



Author::::Matt D Palm
DateTime::::2016-03-11T10:52:42Z
The problem is the way math is taught. It can actually be quite fun and challenging in an insightful way. And the Chinese have mastered these ways. You're basically saying since we're bad at teaching it, we shouldn't. That's silly.



Author::::ID8349490
DateTime::::2016-03-11T10:31:13Z
Another day,another curmudgeonly article by Simon Jenkins. Where to begin?Firstly,i will declare my interest-i have a Maths degree,and i teach the subject to students,but,even if i didn't teach it,i would love it for the fact that it enriches my life in immeasurable ways.Jenkins says he studied "higher maths from calculus to number theory",to study number theory,you would have to do a maths degree,since even physicists-being the nearest thing there is to a mathematician-are not taught this branch of the subject. To have then forgotten it all would seem unlikely to say the least,but still......A quote from Charles Darwin:-"I have deeply regretted that i did not proceed far enough at least to understand something of the great leading principles of mathematics;for those thus endowed seem to have an extra sense". This is true-in all the sciences,not just my speciality of astrophysics,i feel like i have a way in,because i can speak the language that the world is written in (Galileo). I agree with him that Paulos' Innumeracy is an excellent book,although his comment about statisticians is again ignorant and unfair-statisticians do not try to con with statistics,quite the opposite in fact. People who use statistics-politicians and journalists mainly-try to do that. In fairness,this is often out of ignorance,rather than malice,but the end result-chaos ans confusion-is unfortunately the same. Statistics done right tells us what is actually happening out there in the world,rather than what we think may be-this last being,usually, a function of our ignorance and our prejudice. Florence Nightingale's quote:"To understand God's thoughts,one must study Statistics,for these are the measure of his purpose" needs no religious belief,and works just as well in an entirely secular context.Mathematics,statistics and science are our candles in the dark against ignorance and superstition,and they are needed more than ever these days it seems. I cannot for the life of me see how a more mathematically and scientifically literate population would be a bad thing. I accept,however,the thesis that it should be taught in context and not just for its own sake,as most people who love maths come to it through applications;they learn to love it for itself (if they do) later on. So,i reject Hardy's view-lovers of mathematics have nothing to apologise for.It is also not true that every worthwhile application involves higher maths (calculus principally,but not exclusively). Many everyday phenomena in the world around us can be explained with simple ideas. For example,calculating the distance to the horizon from the top of a hill (Pythagoras),why you can see further in heavy rain than misty rain (simple geometry),measuring the width of a river,or the height of a tall object (trigonometry),scaling problems of all sorts,eg,why is an elephant not a scaled-up mouse (the square-cube law),and so on and so on. The list is nearly endless. (I recognise the fact that "interesting" is in the mind's eye of the beholder,and so varies from person to person).I agree that science as taught in schools has broadened out to include more contemporary,and hopefully interesting,topics,but,and it is a big but,the basics of physics must still be taught,or there is no point-"There are two kinds of science:physics and stamp-collecting",as Rutherford once famously remarked.On financial mathematics:-the Black-Scholes equation and its variants were not to blame for the financial crisis. It was people using them incorrectly that did that. Mathematical models are wonderful things,but only where they apply-they must not be used outside their domain of influence,and this is often done by people who don't understand what they are doing. All models are wrong,but many are useful.On the recommending of books:anything by Paulos is good,and for those who wish to understand more about science in general,i would highly recommend Gregory Derry's What Science is,and how it works. It contains very little maths to put off a general reader,in case that should be a problem. I could add a great deal more,but this post has been quite long enough already!



Author::::nicelimboyouhavehere
DateTime::::2016-03-11T10:28:33Z
Your second sentence being kind of true does not make your first one true. Criticising the teaching of mathematics is easy. Doing it well is difficult and the best criticisms often come from mathematicians (Lockhart's lament et al.) The education system systematically misunderstands the basics of what goes on (much more so than many teachers) and this idea about teaching 'stuff' for 'memorization' just should not be true.



Author::::Phil Gollin
DateTime::::2016-03-11T10:22:19Z
.



Author::::Phil Gollin
DateTime::::2016-03-11T10:20:29Z
.



