Headline::::
The Brexit campaign has divided the nation’s plonkers – so now where do I stand?




DateTime::::2016-03-06T17:00:39+0000



<p><span class="drop-cap"><span class="drop-cap__inner">T</span></span>he reassuring sight of <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/20/michael-gove-and-five-other-cabinet-members-break-ranks-with-pm-over-eu">Michael Gove</a>. The soothing presence of Simon Danczuk. The steadying hand on shoulder that is a social media update from Piers Morgan. All familiar things in a time of crisis, I’m sure you’ll agree.<strong> </strong>After all, when you’re in the pub, drunkenly opining about the latest political hot potato – something complicated to do with fracking, say, or the intricacies of prison staffing – how well do you really know the facts? Have you been to the library and dusted down the Howard League for Penal Reform’s 2006 report into youth imprisonment? Or have you, like most people in Britain, just glanced at the viewpoint the biggest plonkers of our age are supporting, and then gone with the opposite?</p>

<p>Jeremy Hunt. Louise Mensch. Dan Hodges. Like your old school friend Ian, whose world only touches yours these days via Britain First links on your Facebook feed and the occasional suggestion that we should “castrate muslamic paedos”, these characters serve a vital public service. They are political bellwethers, guiding lights who illuminate the incorrect path<strong> </strong>more accurately than any deeply held principle or bank of knowledge could. It is a depressing truism that, if it wasn’t for Iain Duncan Smith, this writer would have practically no political opinions whatsoever. I often have to ask myself who I trust more: my own intellect, or the opposite of whatever<strong> </strong>Duncan Smith<strong> </strong>has just said to Andrew Neil on the Daily Politics?</p>

<p>Of course, a small number of issues can be decided from your gut alone. Such things as: should we allow people whose homes we have helped turn into a hellhole into our country so that they don’t have to fly back and be raped and tortured? I like to think that most people don’t need to see where Bill Cash stands on the issue in order to make up their mind (but just in case you do, <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/tory-mp-describes-syrian-refugees-as-a-tsunami-that-could-swamp-europe-10503565.html">he’s there for you, dutifully carrying out this public service</a>). In general, though, when an issue leaves us confused and scared, we have for years been able to rely on the majority opinion expressed by this motley crew of throbbers to show us the righteous path.</p>

<p>Until now. Because now we come to perhaps the biggest crisis modern democracy has ever faced. June’s referendum on British membership of the EU is a crisis of democracy not because I worry whether or not we’re truly in control of how wide our bananas are, but because, for the first time in recent memory, there seems to be a general lack of consensus among the UK’s foremost bellwhoppers over what they think is best. Like the worst Stealers Wheel gig in history, you’ve got Oliver Letwin to the left of you and George Galloway to the right. Whose side am I on here, you think: Nigel Farage’s or George Osborne’s? Iain Duncan Smith’s or Theresa May’s?</p>

<p> <span>Related: </span><a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/19/grassroots-out-unites-politicians-the-ones-we-normally-try-to-avoid">Grassroots Out unites politicians – the ones we normally try to avoid</a> </p>

<p>You’re left stranded and forced to try to work through the issues for yourself, which – trust me – is a complete minefield. A vague sense that it is better to be part of a big gang rubs up against blurry concerns about the treatment of Greece until you’re forced to admit that you haven’t got a damn scooby. But with the bellend brigade splintered down the middle and scattered across both sides of the argument, the whole thing has descended into chaos. No wonder Jeremy Corbyn can’t seem to commit to a strong view: he doesn’t want to end up in a photoshoot with his arm around Nicky Morgan, does he?</p>

<p>You can start to get a bit desperate. What does Facebook Friend Ian think, after all? How about that sexy Greek economist who rides around on a motorbike – should I just go with <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/24/eu-referendum-yanis-varoufakis-says-britons-should-vote-to-stay-in-union">what he’s saying</a>? But what if what he’s saying is the same as what George Osborne is saying, turning everything you held to be true to dust?</p>

<p>To confuse things further, both sides are making all the same arguments, telling us that every conceivable area will be better if we vote for them. Trade will be stronger. Terrorism will be easier to fight. The clouds will be fluffier and bees will say: “Good day, sir.” Both sides have assured me in private conversations that only by voting to remain/leave can I guarantee that Liverpool will win the Premier League title in 2017 thanks to a Jon Flanagan overhead kick in the ninth minute of injury time.</p>

<p>Does this mean one side is lying? Or does it mean that nobody really has the faintest idea? Maybe it leads us to the terrifying conclusion that what UK politics really needs right now is <em>more</em> plonkers. You know, so that we can properly decide matters. They are currently trialling this in the US, and it seems to be working out OK. You definitely know where you stand over there. So I say that it is time for Britain to act. Because when the country’s leading sociopaths can’t all get together and agree on an issue, you know we are heading for the rocks.</p>




Author::::Krustallos
DateTime::::2016-03-09T16:49:23Z
But you haven't produced any facts. You've just stated what you believe to be the case, with no evidence whatsoever, despite several requests. In fact the available evidence seems to show that wages in skilled trades are increasing faster than inflation: 



Author::::stevedeeming
DateTime::::2016-03-09T16:34:17Z
...so the 'idea of sovereignty' is actually a load of bollox...



Author::::saveourcountryside
DateTime::::2016-03-09T15:53:18Z
You say you want 'real information' then you say 'the outers want to jump into a black hole'.Slight inconsistency ?



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-09T14:47:34Z
You really have become very confused. I'm saying economists are split on issues of general elections, NOT Brexit. They are split because the issues involved in general elections are at least as contentious and complex as issues involved in a referendum, which, I feel you need reminding, is what you're ostensibly trying to argue against, though it seems you've accepted my arguments without realising it points to the opposite conclusion you started with. You seem to continue, though, to assert that it is possible for people to very easily balance arguments in general elections yet are incapable of doing so in referenda.



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-09T14:32:53Z
Not really muddying any waters. I said economists aren't split and asked you to name a BREXIT supporter. You can't. Therefore why are politicians, and now overtly, the newspapers 'muddying' the waters (sun banner headline today)? To confuse and confuscate an impossibly difficult debate further. As far as general elections people vote on gut instincts as to which flavour of party best suits/ represents their interests, knowing they can vote them out in four years time. Easy really



Author::::aurelian
DateTime::::2016-03-09T14:12:21Z
Really? That is Santa Claus territory



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-09T12:12:37Z
Does Dan Hodges really count as a plonker? Is it, perchance, anything to do with his view of the Labour leadership? Let's not forget this plonker was one of the few people in the country who predicted Miliband's election loss.



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-09T12:10:10Z
Jesus. I was talking about general elections when I said economists were split. That implies things aren't as easy as you suggest. Indeed, you are correct to say most economists are in favour of remaining - doesn't that rather show the issue is simpler than a general election? And you seem to confuse the kind of discussion we're having. You're trying to argue that this referendum is much harder for joe public to understand than a general election, yet when I mention the various issues, you debate their contents; that's not the point. Moreover, you accept that people don't understand issues in a general election such as crowding out - another own goal.



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-09T11:35:09Z
Missed the message again. Doh. Economists are not split. Name one who supports BREXIT. Politicians are, and aiming to confuscate to achieve their ends. I don't believe for one minute that you understand the crowding out concept anymore than the average person, that's why it's never mentioned in the election. As a monetarist based political party this is a non issue as the Torries seek to withdraw from public provision. As far as fiscal boost is concerned, we haven't had any, quite the opposite its fiscal drag you should be worried about if your in work as the government uses this little economic trick to reduce need to raise direct taxes obvertly. See what I mean? Tricky business isn't, even when you understand the precepts behind the science. Difficult to keep up with economic facts.



Author::::Brian Blackman
DateTime::::2016-03-09T09:04:37Z
It would help if real information was published in the Newspapers.On one side we have the right wing press 'outers' owned either by foreigners, Non_Doms and other miscreants , and the Mirror and the Guardian .One thing we all have in common, no one can really know or tell of the consequences if we do leave. The 'Outers' want to jump into a black hole and hope the rest of the voters will follow them .



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-09T09:03:37Z
I'm sorry, but you've gone one step even further this time. You've completely presupposed your conclusion, and in so doing have completely ignored my last comment. You say you've demonstrated how a voter can judge the issues in a general election but not a referendum. But you haven't. That's what I'm asking you do restate. Why is a voter eminently capable of understanding the debate around fiscal stimulus (increased output, crowding out, the debt trade off), yet is somehow incapable of understanding the debate around a future trade relationship outside of the EU? Why is a decision about which party to vote for somehow easier despite the fact that economists and others are so consistently split on both sides?



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-09T08:38:52Z
It's not illogical. General elections occur every four years. It's easy to see the error of your ways and change your vote preference if dissatisfied and correct a mistake if policy options taken by incumbent politicians are disastrous. This referendum is a one time thing that the ordinary voter is, as I have demonstrated, ill prepared for. The consequence of the wrong move will be a permanent scar on the country. Given sufficient time, all the facts and cool debate, 'joe public' might stand a chance of getting their head around the issues ( though I doubt it). As it stands they have little or none of either, so this referendum becomes a lottery.



Author::::MadWorld
DateTime::::2016-03-09T08:04:35Z
Yes - ignore the facts before your eyes - that untold numbers of skilled workers came to UK and undercut British workers - and believe the lies and propaganda of those who want to hold down wages.



Author::::Expatperth
DateTime::::2016-03-09T00:07:49Z
Must admit I was being sarcastic, but I am sure you got the point.



Author::::Krustallos
DateTime::::2016-03-09T00:06:02Z
Not good enough. All the academic studies on the matter say otherwise. Your "common sense" is based on a profound ignorance of economics. There is far more involved than your simplistic "supply and demand" model.



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-08T22:24:55Z
I just don't see how you think there is somehow less controversy in general elections. I really don't.



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-08T22:09:59Z
Not at all. As a preference I always want to see social equity advance in a general election. Just saying it's relatively easy to decide which political party best represents mine, and others, best interests. In the case of this referendum that clearly is not the case. Look at what is happening to Mark Carney tonight. An economic expert being blasted for giving neutral advice on the economic realities of a BREXIT. How on earth can voters make an informed decision when there is a dearth of information and politicians treating the issue like a game of politicos.



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-08T21:14:19Z
And if a referendum isn't a vote on one issue, but on many, what's a general election?!



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-08T21:10:17Z
But that's the point, the referendum is not one issue really, it's many. It's not as simple as in or out because of the complexities and nuances of the interrelated issues. the majority of these are complex ideas, just the economic ramifications eg trade relations, tarrifs, quota restrictions, renegotiation of bilateral agreements, exchange rate movements, likely current account settlements, foreign direct investment planning or withdrawals. These are just the start. Start considering security issues, loss of Interpol information, treaty of le touquet withdrawal. There are plenty of other issues to consider. All this is bad enough when sufficient information and time , which is crucial for consideration and debate is given, are plentiful. This referendum is a botched job that simply is too great an issue of national importance to be left to politicians to kick around as a football game. The general election is easy. I'm a socialist. I've spent a lifetime coming to this fact hence I will never vote Tory



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-08T18:11:46Z
I can only say it's impressive how you're so cinfident in an argument that is so internally inconsistent. People easily understand the many issues involved in a general election, yet are unable to understand one issue in a referendum. Given the value you've placed on reason so far, I'm not sure how you can be shown the inconsistency in your argument. Perhaps you might explain how the issue, say, of how much the state should spend has split both voters' and economists' opinions? Does that go some way to convince you that issues in general elections aren't intrinsically easier than a singular issue in a referendum?



Author::::JekonGregory
DateTime::::2016-03-08T18:10:45Z
Mate, if you look up to IDS and Gove with dewy eyed admiration well, what can I say? Good luck!



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-08T18:04:30Z
Hmm just did a quick look at the hyperbole included in some of the comments on this page already. Short on actual facts, full on feeling and instincts. And Dave has left it up to them to decide?! I rest my case.



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-08T17:58:24Z
Yep! You've got it. Took you some time to appreciate the context but well done for arriving there. The average person in the street has absolutely no idea what this issue is about, and no hope either. They will use their gut feeling or whichever politician shouts the louder.



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-08T16:58:13Z
What?! You're honestly suggesting that understanding whether or not the state should intervene in markets or cap emissions outputs or reform tax credits is easier than understanding whether or not we're better in a free trade zone or the EU, or whatever? Is that seriously what you're suggesting? That elections are easy for people to deal with because the content is simple whereas the content in an EU referendum is intrinsically more complex? Get real.



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-08T16:53:13Z
Well there you are wrong. The current economic insight into BREXIT is that a period of negative real GDP will result. The difference between forecasts is marked between negative 3 to 6 %. The implications of this on employment, investment and jobs is obvious ( to me as I am an economist). Mark Carney has just put his head on the block by saying as much. However, most people on this website have no idea why or how the transition mechanism of a move out of the EU will will work its way through the real economy or how quickly. The depth of rubbish quoted by posters has been breathtaking. Largely, I suspect because they have no idea how the economy functions and is tied into European trade. Instead, false argument and insinuation about immigration (not realising how immigrant growth in the UK has actually maintained recent growth recover you) has been rife based on the source of all the country's ills. Leaving this complex issue to an irrational electorate is dangerous, particularly when a large vocal and powerful political minority wishes to make capital out of the result. Don't tell me that Boris doesn't understand the economics and is not pursuing his own political career agenda. General elections are totally different and concerned with general ideals that are far easier for the electorate to grasp e.g. Private versus public provision. So long as voters understand the manifesto promises of each party then democratic elections are an irreplaceable way of putting checks and balances into politics. But I suspect you know all this



Author::::kernewegor
DateTime::::2016-03-08T14:10:45Z
And the Isle of Man is really Mannin, the island of Manannan McLir (spellings vary).



Author::::ColomboKid
DateTime::::2016-03-08T12:25:06Z
Well put, simple and logically understandable, what's not to get?.



Author::::ColomboKid
DateTime::::2016-03-08T12:20:37Z
Sacha - Flasher, 



Author::::LondonBuddleia
DateTime::::2016-03-08T11:24:38Z
Thanks, I'll look that up.



Author::::Leoriox
DateTime::::2016-03-08T10:50:04Z
I shan't respond again - no I can see how this conversation does not suit your agenda, does it? 



Author::::ACJB
DateTime::::2016-03-08T10:42:30Z
The other one today has a picture of a large, sunburnt, stereotypical 'chav.'



Author::::ACJB
DateTime::::2016-03-08T10:36:56Z
4 Recommend The political arguments about the EU ...



Author::::Bifocal
DateTime::::2016-03-08T09:50:00Z
Can I suggest that if the UK chooses to leave the EU more than a few countries will follow it. Just look at the ranker being caused by the power mad apparatchiks in Brussels. They only have one strategy, more centralisation. Many countries will not countenance this and will leave with the UK, either immediately, or very soon after the EU migrant flow diverts from the exited UK to them. 



Author::::merulius
DateTime::::2016-03-08T09:49:35Z
Is that anywhere near the Isle of Wight? Interesting but irrelevant linguistic detail: Wight means Man, so the Isle of Wight is really the Isle of Man. Hope that helps.



Author::::Bigfootwriter
DateTime::::2016-03-08T05:53:41Z
I have to say, what a well written piece and I also have no clear picture, and depending on what side I am laying on when i wake up and weather the weather does this or that changes my opinion from in to out as the better or worse option. Confused am I. And yet when it all started i could see as clear as day, it would be a rerun of the Scottish referendum. The yays for departure would edge out infront around now, and the nays to leave would bring out the big guns in the closing days. Europe would have thrown them a few bones to help out and we'd stay, thinking we'd forced Europe to give us more by rattling our swords on the beaches and happy with our little show of defiance in the spring



Author::::andymanc56
DateTime::::2016-03-08T04:56:47Z
Not quite as much rubbish as Boris, Michael, George and the lovely crew of mouth breathers from UKIP, claim! And if you think that France will have any incentive to spend time, effort and money on stopping migrants from trying to get into the uk if we leave the EU, then you must be madder than a box of frogs! I'm guessing from your user name that you are an expatriate living in Australia, so you will forgive me if I give your opinions, safely espoused from thousands of miles away, slightly less weight than those facing the dire consequences from within the UK. It is not rubbish to blanch at the consequences of having to try to renegotiate the hundreds of trade agreements that currently are covered by the EU and, I am convinced that things like security and economic stability are seriously challenged by the prospect of Brexit. But don't let logic get in the way of your little rant.



Author::::suzywong75
DateTime::::2016-03-08T01:09:46Z
I hate IBS just as much as the next sane person, but I'm edging towards Brexit. I can't fully explain why, not right now anyway, but I hope soon to try and formulate a coherent argument for it in my head.



Author::::MadWorld
DateTime::::2016-03-08T01:08:42Z
Common sense.



Author::::unlywnted
DateTime::::2016-03-08T00:13:29Z
"I personally think the EU would have to ensure we pay a heavy price and that's what would happen - a 27 nation kicking."That's right that's how their Mafia-type trade protection racket works - they use threatening devises if you attempt to leave that if used by the Mafia would be criminal.



Author::::the_rustler
DateTime::::2016-03-07T23:32:07Z
If you think that a complex national debate on the future direction of the country can be reduced to mud slinging and voting based on who you like/dislike, then I think the one who needs to grow up is you.



Author::::danhudders
DateTime::::2016-03-07T23:26:03Z
Free trade is something worth having and will have value to the Uk - what the alternative is I don't know but I know a Norway style deal is a waste of time as we may as well stick with what we have - so if a Brexiter wants to convince me - let me know how we would setup our trade deal best and worst case - I personally think the EU would have to ensure we pay a heavy price and that's what would happen - a 27 nation kicking.



Author::::Expatperth
DateTime::::2016-03-07T23:10:47Z
How can the people of the UK dream about leaving the EU, the French have threatened to send all the refugees straight to the UK, heard a rumor they were going to invade the Isle of Man and turn it into a refugee camp, the Spanish are going to take over Gibraltar the day after the UK vote to leave the EU, the Isle Of White will have to change its name to Isle of Black, Blackpool will become the capital of England , and the Germans will stop the sun from rising, Just how much rubbish can Cameron and his cronies claim will happen if the people have the courage to vote to get out of that corrupt organization that is the EU



Author::::supermac1432
DateTime::::2016-03-07T22:52:12Z
Again, your argument makes for no distinction between a general election and a referendum. We will get plenty of electioneering from both sides in the referendum, just as we do in elections - that doesn't make them any more or less informative. And it clearly is difficult to 'comprehend' how each party will change the country - that's why voters consistently split for the Tories or for Labour. And it's why economists are also on either side of the spectrum and thus aligned to either party. You have highlighted, therefore, literally no difference between an election and a referendum. So you still need to answer the question: if joe public have too 'busy little lives' to engage in a referendum properly, why do you refuse to extend that to all general elections, too?



Author::::thereflectiveone
DateTime::::2016-03-07T22:51:48Z
That reasoned argument cannot be quantified, is simply because no one knows. They may 'know' that 'sky is blue' and 'grass is green', but in other respects they either guess, defer or protest. It's quite shameful really; there is no disgrace in saying that you don't know. The numbers are the numbers of today - tomorrow anyone? I'm guided by my dear old Dad 'better to be inside the tent pissing out, than outside pissing in'. How about some argument with a moral imperative, or is that just too much to ask - does no one actually believe in anything any more.



Author::::Huw Edwards
DateTime::::2016-03-07T22:46:10Z
Manifestos party political broadcasts, education. It's not that difficult to comprehend, whereas economic ramifications of BREXIT are, even for the economists



Author::::Glowingembers
DateTime::::2016-03-07T21:49:09Z
People commenting on the Daily Mail are calling the psychotic Iain Duncan Smith a hero.



Author::::Gemgems
DateTime::::2016-03-07T21:28:19Z
Your mode of debate leaves me bemused. You wilfully disregard points I make (e.g. NO ONE is proposing deportation - seriously, NO ONE) and choose instead to label and define my character and motivations without knowing me at all. That is not a discussion I care to continue.Best wishes to you and yours in or out of the EU. I shan't respond again.



