Headline::::
Mental illness is a result of misery, yet still we stigmatise it




DateTime::::2016-02-26T07:00:16+0000



<p><span class="drop-cap"><span class="drop-cap__inner">I</span></span>t matters how we talk and think about mental health. Get it wrong, and people can end up being misled, or even worse, hurt. Last week the BBC ran a well-intentioned season about <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health" title="">mental health</a> that, unfortunately, gave a completely lopsided view of psychiatry.</p>

<p> <span>Related: </span><a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/19/prescription-mental-health-job-experience-employment-wellbeing">The best prescription for mental health? Sometimes it’s just a job | Christina Patterson</a> </p>

<p>The headline programme was Stephen Fry’s <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07187tc" title="">The Not So Secret Life of the Manic Depressive: 10 Years on</a>. Like many mental health professionals, I have enormous respect for <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jul/21/mentalhealth.broadcasting" title="">Fry’s openness about his mental health</a>. I also feel a personal sympathy towards him: we were both boarders at Uppingham school, Rutland, in the early 70s (though he has no reason to remember me). Our unhappy experiences there have no doubt helped to shape our pathways since, which have converged many years later on a shared interest in mental health – in my case as a clinical psychologist and researcher.</p>

<p>The BBC focused on an extreme biological approach to psychiatry, which is contested by many psychologists and psychiatrists. This approach sees psychiatric problems as discrete brain conditions that are largely genetically determined and barely influenced by the slings and arrows of misfortune. According to this view, psychiatric conditions occur largely out of the blue in individuals who are genetically vulnerable, are uncontrollable and lifelong conditions, and the only appropriate response is therefore to find the right medication. This approach is not supported by recent research, which tells a more complex story.</p>

<p>To begin with, we now know to a level of certainty that diagnoses such as bipolar disorder and schizophrenia are not separate conditions. Patients who experience a mixture of schizophrenia and bipolar symptoms are quite common. Furthermore, large numbers of people manage to live productive lives despite experiencing symptoms of severe psychiatric disorders at some time or another, and without seeking help. There is, for instance, an international network for <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.intervoiceonline.org/" title="">people who hear voices</a>, many of whom manage perfectly well without psychiatric care.</p>

<p>And the outcomes for severe mental illness are much more variable than was once thought. Research suggests a surprising number of people manage to make full or partial recoveries, even when not taking medication – though recovery means different things for different people. Whereas mental health professionals often think of it in terms of recovery from symptoms, patients more often emphasise the importance of self-esteem, hope for the future, and a valued role in society.</p>

<p>Of course genes play a role in making some people more vulnerable to psychiatric disorder than others, but the formidable advances in molecular genetics over recent years show that the same genes are involved when people are diagnosed with <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/society/schizophrenia" title="">schizophrenia</a>, bipolar disorder, ADHD and even autism.</p>

<p>More importantly hundreds, possibly thousands, of genes are involved, each conferring a tiny increase in risk. Hence, as American genetic researcher Kenneth Kendler says: “The genetic risk for schizophrenia is widely distributed in human populations, so that we all carry some degree of risk.” Everyone reading this article is likely to have some risk genes although, of course, some will have more than others.</p>

<p> <span>Related: </span><a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/17/mental-health-crisis-needs-fought-robustly-smoking-battle">The mental health crisis needs to be fought as robustly as the smoking battle | Mary Travis Bassett</a> </p>

<p>The fact that so many genes are involved suggests it is unlikely that studying them will lead to therapeutic breakthroughs anytime soon. (Consider Huntington’s disease, a terrible degenerative neurological condition that is caused by a single dominant gene with a known biological function. Years after this gene was discovered there is still no sign of a medical therapy for this simplest of all the genetic conditions.)</p>

<p>Recent studies have pointed to a wide range of social and environmental factors that increase the risk of mental ill health. These include poverty in childhood, social inequality and early exposure to urban environments; migration and belonging to an ethnic minority (all trending in the wrong direction); early separation from parents; childhood sexual, physical and emotional abuse; and bullying in schools.</p>

<p>In an <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/4/661.short" title="">analysis of all the research on childhood trauma and psychosis</a>, my colleagues and I found that exposure to any of these childhood adversities increased the risk of psychosis approximately three-fold, and those who had multiple traumatic experiences were at much higher risk. In fact, the evidence of a link between childhood misfortune and future psychiatric disorder is about as strong statistically as the link between smoking and lung cancer.</p>

<p>There is also now strong evidence that these kinds of experiences affect brain structure, explaining many of the abnormal neuro-imaging findings that have been reported for psychiatric patients. And of course there are myriad adult adversities that also contribute to mental ill health, including debt, unhappy marriages, excessively demanding work environments and the threat of unemployment. Arguably the biggest cause of human misery is miserable relationships with other people, conducted in miserable circumstances.</p>

<p>Why is all this important? For one thing, many psychiatric patients in Britain feel that services too often ignore their life stories. In the words of <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/sep/09/i-hear-voices-in-my-head-but-im-fine-video" title="">Eleanor Longden</a>, a mental health activist, “They always ask what is wrong with you and hardly ever ask what happened to you.” Patients are routinely offered powerful drugs (which clearly have a place but only help some patients), but very rarely the kinds of psychological therapies that may help them come to terms with these kinds of experiences, or even practical advice (debt counselling probably has a place in the treatment of depression, for example).</p>

<p>A narrow medical approach has been extraordinarily unsuccessful, despite what many people assume. Whereas survival and recovery rates for severe physical conditions such as cancer and heart disease have improved dramatically since the second world war, recovery rates for severe mental illness have not shifted at all. Those countries that spend the least on psychiatric services have the best outcomes for severe mental illness, whereas those that spend the most have the highest suicide rates.</p>

<p>To make matters worse, research shows that an exclusively biological approach tends to increase the stigma associated with mental illness. The more that ordinary people think of mental illness as a genetically determined brain disease, and the less they recognise it to be a reaction to unfortunate circumstances, the more they shun psychiatric patients. An exclusively biological approach makes it all too easy to believe that human beings fall into two subspecies: the mentally well and the mentally ill.</p>

<p>Finally, a narrow biomedical approach entirely neglects the public health dimension. Given the evidence, we should be able to dramatically reduce the prevalence of mental health problems by, for example, addressing childhood poverty and inequality, figuring out which aspects of the urban environment are toxic (not surprisingly, living close to a park appears to provide some protection against mental illness), and by aiming to ensure that all our children experience benign childhoods. Some potential influences on mental health (eg the way we organise our schools) have hardly been studied. We cannot create a mentally healthier world if we spend all our time peering into test tubes.</p>

<p>This is not to say that biological approaches have no value, or that research into the genetics and neuroscience of psychiatric disorders has no place. I have been involved in biological studies myself. But portraying mental ill health simply as brain disease can only increase stigma, diverts our attention away from other ways in which we can help patients, stops us from building a healthier world, and encourages in patients alienation, pessimism and a deep despair.</p>




Author::::djdlondon
DateTime::::2016-02-29T06:17:58Z
Never seen such psychobabble from the Guardian.



Author::::dave56
DateTime::::2016-02-29T02:47:51Z
continued, we actually need more articles like this to re-educate and inform, because ignorance, misinformation and superstition feed the prejudice we have to endure from the public, health workers who are medication mad, family and so-called friends in the ''community''. People are more likely to listen to a professor than a patient. Patients can hardly say anything of worth without being given a patronising smile or being met with disbelief. That is how bad the prejudice is. It would not take too much effort for people to read an article like this in a leaflet form, because who knows what people are thinking. While the police and public treat the mentally ill as potentially violent sometimes with fatal results it will take a bit more than saying 'everybody be kind to the mentally ill' to change things. People need to be made aware of the facts, and even then you will get bigots. You mean well but what you are saying is the same as 'everybody stop being racist'. If only it was that simple.



Author::::dave56
DateTime::::2016-02-29T02:03:08Z
You are taking it for granted that the mentally ill want to be included in your society after centuries of abuse.



Author::::MadChinchillaLady
DateTime::::2016-02-29T01:22:56Z
What there would be, is, as just one example, a bunch of struggling kids like I was, who are embarrassed and scared by their need to touch things symmetrically, their counting rituals, distressed by their sometimes terrifying thoughts that flash up endless horrific images, who lose so much time performing their rituals, mental and physical, until things feel 'right' and who have absolutely no idea there's a specific name for what they have and other people like them. I still had a mental illness back then, I just didn't know that's what it was. It didn't resolve by itself, it got worse, over a period of eight years. Learning what it was enabled me to gain some way of dealing with it. It being treated as 'stress' would not have done that, because that's not what it is. Nor does a biomedical model mean mediation is always required (I don't take medication currently. For some people it is helpful), or that people cannot recover or manage their conditions without them. For me, no the medication wasn't going to just resolve everything as a treatment, but that's not what people are expecting it to do. The idea was it would reduce my anxiety and make it easier to handle day to day life and the exposure therapy, because (as one book on OCD very accurately put it), asking someone with OCD to do exposure therapy can feel to them like asking them to stand in front of an oncoming train and not react to it. It's not really that different to my painkillers for nerve damage, it won't fix it, but it dampens down the amount of pain.



Author::::MadChinchillaLady
DateTime::::2016-02-29T00:52:24Z
Those specific examples are neurological conditions, rather than mental illness. Well, provided the person is able to do the job (and whether they are or not will apply regardless of if they're diagnosed or not, indeed having a diagnosis might lead to treatment that would make it easier for them to do the job), then that's down to stigma, not just to having a diagnosis. Certainly I can see why that might be something people want to consider before seeking a diagnosis, it doesn't apply to all jobs though, and for most jobs people don't have to disclose mental illness. Either way it doesn't mean having a diagnosis is intrinsically bad.



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-29T00:33:47Z
If individuals were not given fancy labels (based on a biomedical model), there would not be “people with mental illnesses.” Doctors should simply attend to the temporary symptoms of the patients (such as stress, worry, etc., using psychological methods), without labeling them and referring to them as "lifelong conditions." Studies have shown mental illnesses also resolve by themselves (see: http://nej.sagepub.com/content/19/4/451.short ).



Author::::Architectonic
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:52:03Z
Do you know what would help? Less philosophising by people like Richard Bentall and more effort spent on (a) developing treatments and (b) social change focusing on improving the quality of life of people with mental illnesses - e.g. more kindness, more inclusion and support in our communities and workplaces.



Author::::Edie Carter
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:48:46Z
Your previous post answered in my comment to Kerry26.



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:43:03Z
What is the use of trying to figure out the number of connections, etc., in the brain? We can analyze a human skeletal muscle and talk about the number of myofibrils, etc., but it is the movements of the muscles (exercises) that bring about structural changes in the muscles. In a similar manner mind-related activity brings about structural changes in the brain.



Author::::BertieMcsquirter
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:41:22Z
Well said. Bentall is a fine mind generally but not on this issue. Is he effectively suggesting we should Deny biology so as to sidestep stigma? Where does head up arse with massive wooden spoon code in DSM?



Author::::MartinSilenus
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:26:19Z
I understand how neural nets work just fine, I was supposed to be a bloody mathematician.



Author::::Sosa56
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:24:32Z
Nope just a fan of evidence. If there's no good evidence supporting analysis the same is true for drugs. Interesting that you haven't argued my previous post, I trust the cochrane collaboration



Author::::Sosa56
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:21:46Z
That's one study, albeit a meta analysis. Other studies I've looked at put the split 50/ 50 genes and environment which is an estimate that crops up more frequently. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3077049/#!po=5.28846



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T23:11:17Z
Don’t forget that genetic expression can be changed. In other words genes are not fixed destinies - for example, meditation/mindfulness practises change genetic expression (here is one quick study I just located – there are many such studies: http://www.scirp.org/journal/PaperInformation.aspx?PaperID=56810 )



Author::::Edie Carter
DateTime::::2016-02-28T22:56:42Z
As I posted above: Major depression is a familial disorder, and it's familiality mostly or entirely results from genetic influences. It seems you are determined not to understand that finding.



Author::::MadChinchillaLady
DateTime::::2016-02-28T22:53:44Z
That's just not the case at all. My OCD is not at all the same as just a usual worry, neither is it the same thing as other anxiety disorders, my depression isn't the same as feeling sad. Nor is OCD temporary, there can be improvement, recovery, but is not a cure at present. It's also not an unremitting misery - I rather appreciate the attention to detail it lends itself to, part of how my mind works, which is for me one way of attempting to direct it more constructively. How can someone with schizophrenia who experiences auditory hallucinations be easily equated to a simply stressed neurotypical person?



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T22:42:05Z
Or Emotional Distress



Author::::Edie Carter
DateTime::::2016-02-28T22:40:10Z
You seem to be a fan of analysis - which has been shown in study after study to be ineffectual or certainly no better than placebo. Still, if it works for you!



Author::::Edie Carter
DateTime::::2016-02-28T22:38:45Z
Not sure which part of this you are misunderstanding. From the study I posted: "Medication vs placebo differences varied substantially as a function of baseline severity. Among patients with HDRS scores below 23, Cohen d effect sizes for the difference between medication and placebo were estimated to be less than 0.20 (a standard definition of a small effect). Estimates of the magnitude of the superiority of medication over placebo increased with increases in baseline depression severity and crossed the threshold defined by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence for a clinically significant difference at a baseline HDRS score of 25." 



Author::::MartinSilenus
DateTime::::2016-02-28T22:38:37Z
I had mental trauma induced mental illness, a trauma at University triggered a long term breakdown, so of course trauma & mental illness can be directly causally linked. The problem is that I also have a lifelong Clinical Depressive. My point is this: like a lot of diseases, mental illness can have BOTH Genetic & environmental factors.



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T22:14:08Z
After reading some comments to this article, something I just don’t understand is why scientists fail to grasp that changes in mind-states (such as worry, rumination, etc.) that happen as a result of various outside factors (losing a job, losing a loved one, etc.) CAUSE structural changes in the brain. When outside problems are resolved with time, the brain gets back to normal again (there are SO MANY research studies from the fields of ‘neuroplasticity’ and ‘epigenetics’ as well as other studies supporting this). But if a person is given a label and told that they have a “mental illness” - having that label itself can be devastating to an individual over time, leading to thoughts such as “why me?” “I am doomed for life”, etc., and these thoughts can lead to more worries and depression over time and also result in adverse structural changes in the brain. If anyone has data that show mental illnesses are brain diseases, I would be very interested to see - I would like to see specific studies, not mere correlations. Someone came up with this brain “myth” one day, and everyone now just blindly believes it! This ‘belief’ also gets passed on from generation to generation! In other organs in the body (organs like the liver, spleen, etc.) biological abnormalities are extremely rare. Because scientists do not understand the mind, they simply explain every psychological problem as a “biological abnormality” that somehow needs to be treated with a drug.



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T21:32:17Z
Just another point- Mental Health Labels can stop people getting jobs, eg. an ADD, ADHD diagnosis will prevent a career in the army.



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T21:29:17Z
The misery (that comes as a result of various psychological situations that people experience, that result in worry, rumination, etc.) CAUSES structural changes in the brain – not the other way around! If the doctors did not give fancy labels, then there would not be any stigma either. Doctors should simply treat the symptoms of the patient (such as stress, worry, etc.) and refer to them as temporary conditions that need attention, rather than giving fancy names (labels) to various “mental illnesses” – these names have no logical basis at all.



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T21:22:01Z
thanks



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T21:16:26Z
I would like to see data that show mental illnesses are brain diseases. Misery (arising from any psychological factor) leads to rumination, worry etc., and it is well known that these mind- proliferations result in various mental issues (many studies support this). Also, rumination, worry etc., lead to structural changes in the brain (epigenetics and neuroplasticity). In other words, the changes in the mind-states CAUSED the structural changes in the brain. I really do not understand why people fail to understand this! Also, all the stigma for mental illnesses come from the fancy labels that doctors give the patients based on subjective criteria (without doing any objective tests – as I have described in my other comments below).



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T21:10:10Z
What about PTSD?



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T21:05:23Z
Further to my last comment:"The Health Professions Admission Test is an admissions test used to assist with the selection of students into medicine and health professions degree programs. The test measures a candidate’s logical reasoning and problem solving skills as well as nonverbal reasoning and the ability to understand the thoughts, behaviour and/or intentions of people."This test was introduced some years ago - clearly because there was a need - because some very bright students didn't have "the ability to understand the thoughts, behaviour and/or intentions of people"- due to having Low Social Comprehension - a trait of Disorder - usually in the ASD range. Clearly these borderline ASD types were getting into medicine and are probably still getting in as there are now HPAT courses designed to assist - which defeats the whole purpose. Many people have had experience of a Doctor /Consultant with appalling bedside manner. So how do these types diagnose Mental Health illness (thankfully at least an ASD GP or surgeon can get by without having to understand the patient)? The Psychiatric and Psychological profession is becoming a joke.



Author::::MadChinchillaLady
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:58:25Z
I'm very sorry to hear that, and would certainly agree there can be wrong diagnoses and some very poor mental health professionals, an have personally experienced the way young people can be ignored by them while they go over their heads to a parent who may not handle the situation well. Still I think that accurate diagnosis can be helpful.



Author::::MadChinchillaLady
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:55:37Z
I know the interpretation about cause and effect can vary, but scans have shown differences in activity, meaning there's an objective sign of the condition regardless of if it were the result of neuroplasticity. I think such a response to a diagnosis is a result of stigma that already exists, not of being diagnosed in itself. I'm fairly confident I understand the jargon, and that usually it's used for a useful purpose.



Author::::chris1958
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:37:10Z
'How on earth can portraying mental health as a brain disease give it more of a stigma. 'Picture this. You are grief-stricken for some reason. Or you have been bullied, abused. You've struggled against a ton of adversity and then when you go for help someone says 'There's something wrong with your brain.' and instead of supplying some sort of emotional support and understanding, you get chemicals.



Author::::chris1958
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:27:23Z
I'm not sure if you've grasped what has been implied in this article.Lots of people who are depressed are depressed due to outside factors, e.g. some source of misery.And yes, it is stigmatised - that's why so many people suffer in silence.



Author::::dave56
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:25:43Z
Those suffering from mental illness used to have day centres and day hospitals that we could attend as day patients. There we could enjoy the company of other sufferers. In the community we have to listen to all sorts of ill informed rubbish. Of course misery leads to depression and of course psychosis can be a response to misery. People are generally ill informed and ignorant about mental illness. They usually don't know a schizophrenic from a psychopath.



Author::::gerrygoulde
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:15:20Z
"Mental illness is the result of misery." No, it isn't. It leads to misery but rarely caused by it, unless Richard has just done studies in the "jungle," and the camps in Macedonia and Greece, in which case we want to see his data."yet WE still stigmatise it." I presume this this is the royal "we" as only a tiny number of people are unsympathetic to those with mental illness - the vast majority are very supportive as all mental illness charities will tell you.



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:11:56Z
Your Comment "So my parents expected an intelligent nut-job & boy did they get it in me". Self-fulfilling Prophesy?



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T20:00:19Z
Dr. Dorothy Rowe, Psychologist and Author says that mental illness (including Schizophrenia) is a coping mechanism for fear, for an unbearable environment. I am not a psychologist - I don't know - but it seems strange that a Psychologist would make such a claim- if there was no basis. Others have made similar claims. People are naturally cautious when it comes to taking medication - there are so many books on the subject. One entitled Overdiagnosis and the dangers of iatrogenic treatment, i.e. the cure being worse than the disease. Taking drugs as a last resort - where all other possiblities have been exhaustedis one thing - but taking them as the first resort cant be good



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T19:53:14Z
It is generally believed that many Psychiatrists are in the borderline ASD range. What are your views?



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T19:36:56Z
Doctors use a lot of authentic sounding jargon to justify their diagnosis without using any objective tests. The truth is that despite decades of research, scientists have not been able to find any structural or other brain differences between patients who are “mentally ill” and healthy individuals. This is why there are no objective tests. Also, getting a label can be devastating for most patients, leading to more depression and thinking that they are somehow different from others, ‘doomed for life’ etc. A label can also increase stigma. We also know that changes in the mind (proliferating, ruminating, worry, etc.) is a risk factor for mental illness and also bring about adverse changes in the brain (neuroplasticity).



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T19:28:34Z
What do you mean “rubbish scientists”? If you have not heard of neuroplasticity, you can do some searches on Medline. Do a search for ‘epigenetics’ too. Investigations in epigenetics have shown that mind states bring about changes in genetic regulation. Also I just posted two links (in response to Marya62) – they show that meditation/mindfulness practises bring about healthy structural changes the brain.



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T19:21:43Z
I agree – also there is so much evidence that the practice of meditation/mindfulness brings about healthy structural changes the brain. See: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26106351 http://pps.sagepub.com/content/6/6/537.abstract



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T19:01:50Z
Here’s the reason why I think it is a better hypothesis:When you saw my comment, you felt like disagreeing. You may have even felt a bit angry. If I provoked you more, you might get angrier and even feel depressed. Do you think all this happened because your brain changed, or due to changes that happened in your mind as a result of experience? When someone has to face a job loss, it is this worry that makes the person depressed, not because the brain changed right when he lost the job. Regarding physical basis, it gives the impression that these problems cannot be overcome.



Author::::marya62
DateTime::::2016-02-28T18:48:04Z
My children have been diagnosed as Asynchronous Gifted (adult intellect and intense -which requires special education), Unfortunately a similarly Gifted intense relative was years ago misdiagnosed as "dysphoric bi-polar" - his highs allegedly anxiety and his lows allegedly depression. Some time later - after years of medication - he was told that there is no such thing a dysphoric bi-polar - that he was suffering from life and that the treatment he got has irreversibly damaged his memory. Another gifted and intense relative tragically opted out of education and life (this is typical of certain giftedness profiles). I m currently reading a book on overdiagnosis called "The Fear Cure" by Dr. Lissa Rankin which says that if death from Medical Error was recorded in statistics it would rank as the third highest killer in the US after heart disease -and that's only counting deaths in hospital - not those following discharge. Psychology is reputedly only in its infancy compared to physical medical illness. There is an explosion of books at the moment on Mental illness - many psychiatrists and psychologists saying that the psychiatry /psychology industry is based on sham. I am not knocking the industry entirely. I read Dr.Dorothy Rowe who I think is full of common sense and no doubt there are many very good Psychiatrists and Psychologists out there - but there appears to be many who over use medication and or who needlessly harmfully label. The DSM has some very spurious disorders - one being lobbied for at the moment - PAS Parent Alienation Syndrome - for children who take a negative reaction to the abandoning parent in a separation / divorce. That's hardly fair - the child blamed for normal upset - what longterm harm will that do?



Author::::Kerry26
DateTime::::2016-02-28T18:30:46Z
These types of links/articles are so deceiving. They only think in terms of old conditioned ways, and forgets about new information such as the science of epigenetics and neuroplasticity. These new findings have clearly shown that mind states bring about changes in the brain (and also change genetic expression). Those links/articles (you have posted about genes etc.), also take away any hope of recovery from a person who has been “diagnosed” (remember that doctors “diagnose” mental illnesses using a check list - there are no objective tests for diagnosing these). Losing hope only makes one feel devastated, making symptoms worse, and making him/her really “mentally ill.” You maybe interested is seeing this video (by a psychiatrist) who says labels for schizophrenia should be dropped: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sE3gxX5CiW0



Author::::MartinSilenus
DateTime::::2016-02-28T18:27:41Z
Never linked to online images before, worked really well!Simply save to OUTLOOK page as e-mail link & then COPY/PASTE to this text box, very easy: will use again.http://www.schizophrenia.com/sz.images/schizophrenia.risks.jpg 



Author::::Jennol
DateTime::::2016-02-28T18:19:49Z
https://janesblog19.wordpress.com/2015/04/29/mental-health-awareness-week/



Author::::jonbob47
DateTime::::2016-02-28T18:02:45Z
I agree entirely. And it appears that I've misenterpreted you slightly. You'll have to forgive me for that. So thanks for the correction.



Author::::MartinSilenus
DateTime::::2016-02-28T18:00:29Z
http://www.schizophrenia.com/research/hereditygen.htmOK, the above link is a good reliable site, like medline+ it is American, the best medical sites just are.



Author::::LaCourt
DateTime::::2016-02-28T17:34:32Z
One more thing. Big Pharma is the Big Winner in this whole scenario.



