Headline::::
Deutschland 83 has wowed the world – pity the Germans don’t like it




DateTime::::2016-02-17T16:33:07+0000



<p><span class="drop-cap"><span class="drop-cap__inner">G</span></span>ermany’s relationship with cinema resembles England’s with football: a strong sense that this is something the country used to be world class at. Yet this is coupled with a growing frustration at being unable to rediscover that success – despite, or perhaps because of, the resources thrown at it.</p>

<p>At no other time of the year is this wounded sense of pride as openly on display as during the 10 days of the Berlin film festival, which closes on Sunday. This year, many critics are tearing up their notebooks over the fact that only a single German production made it into the competition programme. Ninety years of hurt – and yet the golden era of Murnau, Lubitsch and Lang feels as distant as ever.</p>

<p>You’d think the cinephiles have grounds for hope: cold war TV drama <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/03/channel-4-cold-war-drama-deutschland-83" title="">Deutschland 83</a>, which premiered at last year’s festival, has gone on to become an international success story, with rave reviews, bloggers <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/04/fashion-in-deutschland-83" title="">celebrating its fashion</a> and <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://blog.chrisgrabinski.com/2015/06/27/the-complete-soundtrack-to-deutschland-83/" title="">soundtrack</a>, and impressive viewing figures, even in the US. In Britain, where the series finished last Sunday, the first episode was the <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/deutschland-83-becomes-uks-highest-rated-foreign-language-drama" title="">highest-rating subtitled drama</a> in television history.</p>

<p> <span>Related: </span><a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/03/channel-4-cold-war-drama-deutschland-83">Deutschland 83: ‘A lot of people were happy in East Germany’</a> </p>

<p>What Walter Iuzzolino, the “curator” of Channel 4’s foreign-language drama service, doesn’t quite tell you is that <a class="u-underline" data-component="auto-linked-tag" data-link-name="auto-linked-tag" href="http://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/deutschland-83">Deutschland 83</a> was designed to be the big ballsy production that restored German TV’s pride, with the marketing budget to go with it. Yet by the time the last episode was shown in Germany last December, it had shed half its starting audience, with only 1.72m viewers. Not quite “the flop of the year”, as Bild called it, but underwhelming nonetheless.</p>

<p>The odd situation is that after decades of being seen as boring and ugly, <a class="u-underline" data-component="auto-linked-tag" data-link-name="auto-linked-tag" href="http://www.theguardian.com/world/germany">Germany</a> has found a way of making people abroad think it is cool and sexy – yet Germans don’t like it. I think I see why.</p>

<p>By focusing the story around Martin Rauch, a young East German border guard going undercover in the west, it doesn’t just make the viewer empathise with a Stasi agent on a human level – in the way The Lives of Others did – it makes us engage with the socialist regime’s worldview, in which a military exercise in West Germany poses a potentially <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://historynedblog.wordpress.com/2016/01/31/sympathy-for-the-devil-seeing-the-world-through-the-eyes-of-the-stasi-in-deutschland-83/" title="">existential threat</a>.</p>

<p>Yet as if to make up for such a radical premise, it then backtracks into stereotype. Stasi officers are cruel ideologues who blackmail family members and fake reports for political ends. The West German officers have messed-up private lives, but they are honest. And to top it all, the peace movement in the west turns out to have been infiltrated not just by Soviet agents, but <em>gay </em>Soviet agents at that – a McCarthyite fantasy come true. In Germany, where the cold war can still send chills, that feels a bit too simple.</p>

<p>If there was one German series I wish would find its way on to British TV sets, it is <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x83IFgKeOvI" title="">Der Tatortreiniger</a>, a strange little comedy series about a crime scene cleaner, which premiered in a graveyard slot on a regional network in 2011 but has built a cult following since. In each episode, protagonist Heiko “Schotty” Schotte, whose job “begins when others throw up in horror”, enters the site of another gruesome murder and has to bleach blood-soaked carpets and hoover up bits of brain. Because death for Schotty is as everyday as a burst pipe for a plumber, he doesn’t see the tragedy. Off-the-cuff conversations with neighbours, axe murderers and ghosts of the deceased can spiral into philosophical dialogues. The show has a Brit-flavoured sense of black humour, and a surreal quality that reminds me of Edgar Wright’s Spaced, yet a subtitled version has only ever been screened in the US.</p>

<p><strong> </strong>At the very least, chain-smoking Schotty would help dispel the myth that Germans are exemplars of professionalism. I was reminded of this when I was grounded by a nasty cold last week. The German health system, which is less centralised than the NHS, can be shockingly free-and-easy at times. One Berlin doctor once told me that I should breathe on her when I thought I had a throat infection – saying she could smell whether it was serious or not. Though that’s nothing compared to the doctor a friend once saw about his high cholesterol. “I work hard, and I like a beer or two in the evening,” the friend said. “Give it to me straight, doc.” The man in the white coat looked at him long and hard, then got out a map of the city. “There’s a restaurant around the corner – they do a good, bloody steak there. Get a table twice a week and you’ll be fine.”</p>




Author::::UnashamedPedant
DateTime::::2016-02-20T10:54:30Z
it's incongruent for use by a character made out to be as in tune with the regime as Annett. There definitely wouldn't have been a school that served them under this name.



Author::::birney
DateTime::::2016-02-20T09:15:47Z
We thought so too, or that it had a wry black humour about it which is very enjoyable. Were East German girls ever so naturally lovely though?



Author::::ID418662
DateTime::::2016-02-20T07:43:25Z
Hi Iain, thanks for your detailed reply, which is appreciated, and I do understand that you're not trying make political points and describing your own experience, and it is much appreciated! I'm actually off to Germany today so can't reply in detail at the moment, but would you be willing to share a few more details about the phones? Would these lines have gone private homes? But then those must have been homes really close to the wall that could be reached in Berlin, and not connected to the East German network? At any rate you said these were for people "in the know" so it really makes Martin's call even more implausible.



Author::::ID418662
DateTime::::2016-02-20T07:29:25Z
Hi, while the remark about restaurants surprises me, I'm not saying that it would always have been completely eradicated (in the 1980s, it would have been used again in academic or historical contexts), but just saying that it's incongruent for use by a character made out to be as in tune with the regime as Annett. There definitely wouldn't have been a school that served them under this name.



Author::::OliverIrish
DateTime::::2016-02-20T00:53:44Z
Cool theme tune, lovely sets … otherwise it's a risible attempt at historical drama marked by woeful acting and hilariously implausible plots. Ducking out after five episodes. A triumph of marketing over substance, blatantly.



Author::::maryjane01
DateTime::::2016-02-19T23:35:40Z
Why would they arrest people once they were leaving?



Author::::IainExileScot
DateTime::::2016-02-19T22:29:36Z
Third comment in reply to ID418662.



Author::::IainExileScot
DateTime::::2016-02-19T21:55:49Z
Continued from previous comment.



Author::::IainExileScot
DateTime::::2016-02-19T21:53:05Z
I reply to your comments, I was not attempting to play down or ignore how difficult the situation was in the old DDR or indeed promote the GDR Ministry for State Security (MfS), commonly called the Stasi ; but I will try and answer some of your points, if I may.Although I am not a native German, either from the old FDR or DDR; I have travelled extensively to what was the old Warsaw Pact over a number of years and I have spoken with a large number of people who lived through the communist times and I was constantly surprised how many of the older people in what was the DDR and who had lived through the entire period of the Cold War; harked back to the apparent security of the DDR. This way come as a shock to those of us who live in what we like to term a “Western democracy” and cannot possibly comprehend that anyone would prefer to live under a dictatorship, to what we think of as freedom; but when you actually listen to what these older people have to say, you begin to see their point of view. In the DDR, people were “cared for” from cradle to grave, they had cheap, usually communal heating if in the cities, free health care, good standard of education, everyone had jobs and whose who could not work, due to say disability, were provided for and everyone had a state pension. Now by Western standards, life was drab and there were terrible shortages of consumer goods, the communal heating was provided by burning Lignite (brown coal) in power stations which produced what in people in Berlin (both East & West) was ironically called the “Berlinerluft”, (Berlin air) which hung like a smog over not just Berlin, but many other DDR cities and many first time visitors found themselves constantly coughing due to this Berlin air; but despite all these things deprivations there was some certainty in people’s lives.In was a fact that retired West Germans could live in the DDR, travelling freely back and forward and still claim their West German pensions; this was just one example of a number of agreements reached between both German governments; in the case of West Germans pensioners, they brought West Marks into a DDR economy that was desperate for “hard” foreign currency; to allow them to buy foreign products as the East Mark was considered worthless by Western countries. As for the FDR (Western Germany), it was always regarded a faith, or commitment that both parts of Germany would eventually reunite; some they wanted to maintain as much as possible a working relationship with the DDR. In the FRD, it was a custom at Christmas time, for each house to place a candle in eastern facing window and it was usually quite a moving moment and not just some afterthought.In regard to my comments regarding the reluctance of people to either talk about or mention the location of the GDR Ministry for State Security (MfS) in Berlin; this was in 2003 many years after the Wall had come down. My wife and I were staying in a hotel in old East Berlin and the hotel staff denied to my face that there was a Stasi headquarters in Berlin and even when I provided written proof; they eventually said to me it was in an out of the way location very hard to find (I knew this was a lie, but I played along) and they suggested that if we decided to travel there by taxi, we should ask for a different address, some way from the MfS, as taxi drivers would be reluctant to take us there. At the time, I also spoke with people in restaurants and a couple of bars in East Berlin and they told me it was the usual custom to try and deny or maybe possibly more correctly, try to forget the past and saying that there had been no MfS (Stasi) headquarters in Berlin was one way of doing this. In October 2006 I visited the MfS headquarters and the curator told me that there was a lot of pressure being put on him by the Berlin government to close down the “museum” that he and others had struggled to both set up and maintain, in commemoration to people like himself who had suffered under the Stasi and at that time of my visit he told me the museum was being kept going by donations. He told me that the Berlin government had told him it was time to “move on” and that there was no need to keep “raking up the past”; it was around about this time that certain revelations had been uncovered by the researchers, piecing together the shredded remains of old MfS documents, but whether this had any connection, is not for me to say, but I am glad that the museum seems to be now be on firm foundations and I will certainly plan to re-visit next time I am in Berlin.As to the point about phone calls between the FDR and DDR this was certainly true; yes there were a number of difficulties, as I said, but it could and was done quite regularly. I have a lot of technical knowledge of how contacts were maintained covertly; but I don’t really want to get into that on an open website.



Author::::sachsen
DateTime::::2016-02-19T18:50:12Z
As an East German I enjoyed it, however, the English translation was atrocious and left out important clues, like in the last episode when they gave away that Martin was the son of Schweppenstette and Ingrid, that was completely lost in translation. They translated "our boy" simply as "Martin". There was another incident which I don't remember now. All in all, it made me feel strangely nostalgic!



Author::::crisscross
DateTime::::2016-02-19T17:02:44Z
I don't think that Corbyn is a communist as such, but I do believe that he has been an apologist for the Soviet Union and its successor, the Russian republic. He even chose to take Diane Abbott on a trip to East Germany, which very few British people would have visited. I also think that he is a great believer in nationalised industries. I know quite a few Corbyn admirers, and they all believe strongly in nationalisation, and appear to think that capitalism is essentially evil. I do not share this view.



Author::::mediahawk
DateTime::::2016-02-19T16:31:18Z
Loved it, and was amazed to find out how much was historically accurate. Having lived through that era, I felt it really captured the atmosphere of mutual paranoia that existed and blighted millions of lives. Giving the East German perspective on it gave it a distinctiveness it would not otherwise have had, and I found that very moving. They were just as frightened of us as we were of them! It illuminated the farcical aspect of the brinkmanship. 



Author::::rootietootie
DateTime::::2016-02-19T15:58:00Z
Tatort? I'm sorry, I don't know. I haven't kept up with German stuff for a few years now. Presently I enjoy visiting the odd world of filmic Finland and Sweden and Norway. Not epic stories though, and not to everyone's taste.



Author::::fastgameplayer
DateTime::::2016-02-19T14:56:52Z
Maybe. My German is patchy, or just poor, but most of the dialogue was everyday stuff rather than a discussion of Hegelian philosophy and I had little difficulty, after the first quarter hour of the first episode pushed my brain back into it.



Author::::fastgameplayer
DateTime::::2016-02-19T14:47:24Z
Very funny - no really - very funny.



Author::::sanspeur
DateTime::::2016-02-19T14:21:32Z
Funnily enough I was looking at them both on Amazon recently. I could have kicked myself for not recording Heimat when it was on TV. And Fassbinder's stuff is also available. It helps me to keep up with the language. Downfall is one of the most watched films in my collection. I enjoyed, if that's the word, The Lives of Others, and Sophie Scholl. What is the long running series Tatort like, do you know?



Author::::rootietootie
DateTime::::2016-02-19T13:18:33Z
'I hope the Corbynistas in this country read your comments for information as to what life in a communist country was really like'



Author::::rootietootie
DateTime::::2016-02-19T13:10:55Z
They're quite old now of course... so hope they're still available.I saw Heimat on TV, but actually they were done as films.., so technically don't count as TV production. The first series is the best I think, but it's all really good and interesting.Berlin Alexanderplatz was made for TV, and is my favourite of all Fassbinder's stuff, but of course not everyone likes Fassbinder.Hope you like them if you get the chance to see them.



Author::::UnashamedPedant
DateTime::::2016-02-19T12:50:21Z
The other one was this silly 100%ige blond girl Annett cooking up "Königsberger Klopse", a totally unlikely term for someone her age, with her communist sympathies to use.



Author::::UnashamedPedant
DateTime::::2016-02-19T12:23:35Z
PS A search in an electronic corpus of classic German literature found dozens of instances of "Detail" in Goethe, with some in Fontane, Lessing, Schiller, Ebner-Eschenbach et al.; a search in an electronic German selection from Marx and Engels also found "Detail" dozens of times. Interestingly, the former corpus included "signifikant" once, the latter not at all. But such terms are likely to have been more common in the late 20th century. By the way, don't assume that they were both "lifted from English": German borrowed "Detail" from French in the 18th century at the latest, and as the result stated above shows, by the 19th century it had become naturalized.



Author::::ID8688170
DateTime::::2016-02-19T10:43:51Z
Thanks for the info. I didn't think anyone would be forced to use it, but I'm glad to hear that at least you are made to pay extra so that you wouldn't effectively be subsidising someone else to get homeopathy treatment.I'd say we can choose our doctor too really, certainly your GP.



Author::::ID8688170
DateTime::::2016-02-19T10:40:36Z
'My future monarch' is German



Author::::BobD777
DateTime::::2016-02-19T10:21:38Z
Well, there's more than a few instances of incompetence in the bundeswehr and the Ministerium. Not so far off the mark I think.



Author::::BobD777
DateTime::::2016-02-19T10:17:07Z
in that country



Author::::BobD777
DateTime::::2016-02-19T10:16:32Z
All 4 catch up, no adds. ;)



Author::::crisscross
DateTime::::2016-02-19T09:48:38Z
Very interesting. I hope the Corbynistas in this country read your comments for information as to what life in a communist country was really like. Your description of waiting for a telephone reminds me of what it was like in the UK when all our utilities were nationalised. In 1979, when of course there were no mobile phones, my mother had to go 6 months without a telephone after moving into her flat in South London, purely because British Telecommunications had a waiting list. She used to go to the phone box. Of course, this can happen when you have a monopoly supplier.



Author::::sanspeur
DateTime::::2016-02-19T09:35:36Z
Oh dear, have I offended you by not liking Jericho?Woops!



Author::::sanspeur
DateTime::::2016-02-19T09:31:16Z
Thanks for that. I'll put thses 2 on my wish list!



Author::::sanspeur
DateTime::::2016-02-19T09:26:37Z
Thanks for your insight.



Author::::sanspeur
DateTime::::2016-02-19T09:24:16Z
Danke vielmals!!! Bis bald!



Author::::JBowers
DateTime::::2016-02-19T09:23:29Z
Oh. Thought it was Edward Fox on a bad day, but you might be right (I'm sure one of the Stasi said he was handing over to Carlos).



Author::::shatnersbassoon1
DateTime::::2016-02-19T09:20:27Z
Ah..good point. I hope so.



Author::::Mudking
DateTime::::2016-02-19T08:26:31Z
Yes, the german press reports on a second season called Deutschland 86.Screenwriting has already startet.



Author::::biffertron
DateTime::::2016-02-19T08:01:33Z
Beg to differ, I thought he was excellent. Like a Cold War Good Soldier Schwek



Author::::DC1234
DateTime::::2016-02-19T03:59:07Z
David Bowie - Heroes? 



Author::::ID418662
DateTime::::2016-02-19T01:58:24Z
Well that doesn't make Tischbier Soviet, does it? I don't think the Große Bruder would have loomed large when he made his decisions from what we see about him in the series. But really, while you are correct in that nothing East or West Germany did was done without "their" superpower's knowledge and approval, the premise in the post I am replying to is somewhat different - namely, that this was _not_ the case historically, but the Germans are making it up because they can't, as per the original poster's assumption, face up to their own responsibility. I don't think that's true (if anything Germany overestimates her importance in the superpowers' assessment of the cold war), but D83's logic is the exact opposite: The only people facing moral dilemmas are the German characters - Alex, Martin/Moritz, Edel, Annett, Martin's mum, Schweppenstette, the Stasi translator, even Tischbier and the Stasi aunt. The plot never puts the Russian and American characters into a position where they have to question their motives and values. I can't see any viewing of the series that would convincingly argue that it somehow absolves the German characters of the ethically questionable choices they make.



Author::::ID418662
DateTime::::2016-02-19T01:35:04Z
A few remarks as a native East German:



Author::::Jannerboy
DateTime::::2016-02-19T01:21:04Z
Ah! Never thought of that!I doubt the series creators did either but appreciate your point.



Author::::Jannerboy
DateTime::::2016-02-19T01:16:35Z
Of course! Thanks for jogging my memory.



Author::::Ash Langford
DateTime::::2016-02-19T01:16:06Z
I absolutely loved it, will there be any more or is that it?



Author::::vivanato
DateTime::::2016-02-19T00:27:31Z
'86 was the year of the Reykjavik summit between Gorbachev and Reagan, and the whole SDI/Star Wars/ arms control negotiations thing. Probably a certain amount to keep the spooks busy!



Author::::SueS
DateTime::::2016-02-19T00:24:18Z
Deutschland 83 was meh. I watched it on Amazon because The Americans does not come on again until March and I needed a fix of 80s Cold War spying skulduggery. Some excellent supporting actors, but the main actor was a bit blank IMHO and not quite up to carrying the weight of the show.



Author::::vivanato
DateTime::::2016-02-19T00:17:38Z
No, the peace protesters weren't all Stasi agents or dupes. But on a show that revolves around East German intelligence efforts those are the two kinds you're most likely to meet.



Author::::vivanato
DateTime::::2016-02-19T00:04:40Z
Communist true believers did presumably exist in East Germany, as elsewhere. They may by the 1980s have been a minority, but they did exist. Plus Annett is dating the nephew of a senior regime spook, so you might expect her to have an above average degree of belief in the system.



Author::::vivanato
DateTime::::2016-02-18T23:57:17Z
Well, yes, but then Martin isn't a professional Stasi agent. He's a regular soldier who was press-ganged, given only basic training and then sent West. Somewhat more believable that he'd question some of his orders. And, of course, he isn't betraying the East German state, merely trying to alert it to a disastrous error in intelligence analysis.



Author::::phughes
DateTime::::2016-02-18T23:50:10Z
Thanks!



Author::::ID313737
DateTime::::2016-02-18T23:41:02Z
What everyone seems to have missed is that Deutschland 83 is a satire - so its not a straight drama but a caricature of German politics in 1983! Wake up Guardian readers! Didn't you notice?



Author::::IainExileScot
DateTime::::2016-02-18T23:31:10Z
When I visited the Stasi Headquarters some years ago, it was so-called difficult place to find; mainly because so many Berliners were still denying such a place actually every existed. This was not helped by the fact that the Berlin government were trying to do everything possible to close down all public access to the former GDR Ministry for State Security (MfS) and put an end to researchers trying to piece together old records. Even hotels or taxi drivers kept insisting that there was no Stasi headquarters in Berlin.When I finally got to the “hidden” GDR Ministry for State Security (MfS), after much trouble and making a few calls to old colleagues and having to remember the old long ago forgotten passwords; I finally managed to find the location. In actual fact the GDR Ministry for State Security (MfS) is on a main U-Bahn line and when you exit the U-Bahn at Magdalenenstr station; it is a only a very short walk between block of low rise flats and you come to House 1 (or Building 1) on your right hand side; although at that time you had to know what you were looking for because there were no signs; strange when you think over 30,000 people had worked for MfS. When my wife and I first arrived at the main reception, we were met by a man who informed us that he had been a “guest” of the Stasi some years before and that he and a few other “guests” were trying against a very active and powerful political elite who were determined to bury the past. He was at that time trying to set up a museum basically singlehandedly; but he was very determined that he would succeed and I now see there is even a website for the museum; here is the link for anyone interested: http://www.stasimuseum.de/en/enindex.htmI see from some comments that there was a degree of scepticism that someone could telephone from the West to East Berlin or even vis versa; I don’t know why this should so, as ordinary people could telephone each way; of course in like in present day Britain (and in fact it has always been the situation) all international calls were monitored. Of course Berliners are a very adaptable people and a number of secret direct lines were installed between the 2 Berlins (East and West) and if you were in the know, regular communications were possible, usually without being actively monitored; but most people took the chance. By the way, out of interest, the general public are used to seeing tapped phone lines on TV as being noisy or clicking or whatever; in fact the opposite is true a tapped line would be crystal clear, after all what is the point of recording a lot of noise and clicks? There is also much talk about the “impenetrable” Berlin Wall, in fact people were still able to travel both ways” admittedly with some difficultly; after all trade had to take place between the separate parts of Berlin and also between and through both Germany’s. Berlin Westies were able to freely travel to East Berlin after queuing for and paying the “administration charge” in West Marks; they were free to stay the day in East Berlin. In fact every evening busloads of tourists passed through the main checkpoints to visit the Theatres in East Berlin. Also if you had a passport issued by a “neutral” country you could freely travel both ways through the checkpoints; the Irish passport being the one of choice for “certain individuals” who wanted to ensure their visits to East Berlin remain undetected. Anyone passing through from West to East Berlin had hidden marks put on their passports, so they could be monitored; one trick being to allow a person freely into East Berlin; only to have them arrested when they tried to leave again. In the case of travel between the East and West Berlin by residents in the East; this was usually by the issuing of special passes, usually restricted to family visits, or even hospital appointments. Of course there was an incentive for these people to return to the East; as for example by holding a relative in police detention until they returned. For people of retirement age, there were no restrictions in travelling each way and it was quite usual for West Berlin retirees to live in the East; because with even a modest pension they could live in some relative luxury. I have spoken with many people who used to live in what was the DDR and a lot still hark back to the old days especially when it came to free social care, hospitals, education and heavily subsidised heating and power. They were finding it difficult to adjust to the changes and even now the Easties are treated in a lot of ways as second class citizens and this is very apparent when you visit some towns in the old East; where wages are still lower than the in the West, although some prices are also lower, but not by that much.



Author::::rcil2003
DateTime::::2016-02-18T23:14:39Z
I enjoyed it, was looking forward to Deutschland 89, but I am surprised to see that we probably will not get one



Author::::JonBradfield
DateTime::::2016-02-18T23:03:39Z
German friends tell me two things about the show and German tv in general.



