Sadly I think you will be proved correct .


I suppose when looking at reasons to leave the EU, or to stay we must not look only at the situation in the country today but what situation the country will be in the future for our children and there children after all this is not only about ourselves or is it. Over the past year we have seen the services in this country declineand struggle to cope NHS, Education, Police cut backs and many more, housing in short supply there are 13 thousand families waiting for social housing in the City where I live and the council say they are lucky to have 2 thousand houses available a year.Over the past 15 years this countries population has grown by 10% by uncontrolled immigration 640 thousand last year and rising year on year. The future looks much worse with with Eastern European immigration increasing,the refugee problem, and Turkey being fast tracked for membership. The predicted population of the UK in the year 2028 will be 75 million and can be seen tobe true with immigration to the UK increasing year on year how can this country cope with these figures, Cameron has said 200 thousand houses to be built by 2020 and at this rate of build we would be lucky to have 500 thousand extra homes if the land is available,the NHS and other social services will no doubt be privatized by then.


"The EU commission ONLY (!) Proposes legislation ".There you have it . Out of a Euro loons own mouth . Nobody but the commission can propose legislation . Not the Council . Not the European Parliament . They both function much as our house of lords does .The commissioners are not elected . They are political appointess . Nobody elected can propse legislation . Boris is 100 % correct . Its totally undemocratic.


EU officials cant be relied on to make comments in a real way since they are too busy making new regulations for others to abide by and have not a clue about what people want. They are not even aware that there are real people beyond politician in members states


