Here is 2 more things the E.U as done for us, kept 2 of Labours grasping as beens in a life of luxury (namely) Kinnock and the murderer The right un honerable Senator Blair, Both un elected to the gravy train


Absolutely correct.The Tories think they are still at boarding school playing 'jolly japes' with each other. Typical of their whole attitude to 'government'.


I think the most rational opinion on the EU is ambivalence. Historically it has been a great protector, and champion of all the things mentioned. More recently, it's done some ugly stuff and seems overly influenced by some undesirable interests (I'm talking banks and multinationals here, not immigrants).Overall, I'd say the world of the next few decades could be pretty unstable if the worst of global warming takes place, and it's probably best to at least start off with good allies. Easier to leave than to join.


Nice to see a leader of the Labour Party who is willing to point out the brutal truth of these negotiations. There are so many issues with the EU, and it's such a significant world power, we had one chance to really change the way things worked in Europe and Cameron spent it on a temporary appeasement for xenophobes.


My god Corbyn is a muppet!


The behaviour of MP's on the government benches during yesterday's "debate" was more akin to the behaviour of infants in the school playground than to elected representatives in the chamber of this country's parliament. Shame on them and on their childish baying and catcalling antics. 


This may be too complicated for the tiny brains of racists and little Englanders, but I'll keep it simple.Corbyn is mistaken to support the EUHowever his reasons are different from the nationalist and racism of FarageThe Marxist left calls for leaving the EU because it will weaken the ToriesBut we oppose all immigration controls and attacks on the pay and conditions of the working classThe EU is no mechanism for achieving that.Militant union fights are.


Thank you for proclaiming "Say no to racism". Unfortunately the rest of you post proves you are a cowardly hacker, with PC racism.Please FO


Been hacked again, then comrade Jaw-jaw?


Corbyn disgusts me, a true enemy of the state.


The state is a completely unelected body of senior bureaucrats, judges, heads of the military and so on.Why shouldn't someone be an enemy of it?


Thank you for demonstrating that the extreme right has its own concept of PC, and does not stand for free speech, but for cowardly hacking. Now P/o you racist scum.


