"Socialism 'more popular' with British public than capitalism". Yeah, right.Is that why the print edition of this very newspaper sells fewer than 60,000 copies and is closing down? Is that why Socialist Worker sells fewer than 8,000 copies?Is that why the Guardian is making horrendous losses and is only surviving thanks to its offshore trust fund and the BBC buying tens of thousands of copies every day to tell them what the news agenda is?


It is not that more people find Socialism more attractive merely that Dodgy Dave and Gidiot make Capitalism so damned unattractive except for the top few. This is reinforced by the utter despicable behaviour of our fraudster MPS and blatantly unfair electoral system that does not reflect the aspirations of the electorate and makes them believe their vote is wasted. 


"British people prefer socialism to capitalism, a new survey has found."Curious, then, that they so rarely choose to vote in a way that accords with these findings.


There hasn't been a socialist alternative offered to the electorate in the last 25 years. Now that the world economy is teetering on another recession perhaps a socialist programme will be relevant. If we could build enough social/affordable houses with a "green" agenda that would stimulate jobs and scientific research to make Britain a world leader. It is crazy that the gap in wealth and opportunity has widened to leave the vast majority of the UK population struggling from one month to the next.


Largely agree with that - not least the last sentence!Nevertheless the last time that UK voters wholeheartedly opted for anything really resembling "a socialist alternative" was 1945. You can't count 1997 because Blair achieved that victory on the back of a ludicrously divided Tory party, and on a strategy of denying that Labour was still socialist.


"There hasn't been a socialist alternative offered to the electorate in the last 25 years."Rubbish. TUSC put up 128 candidates last May. They got a grand total of 36,327 votes. An average of 283 votes per constituency. They lost all their deposits.There is no army of Socialist voters sitting at home just waiting for a politically reliable comrade to stand. You're living in a dreamworld.


A government that is formed on a 24% proportion of the vote is an unqualified mandate for capitalism? I don't think so. It is an iniquity of the FPTP electoral system and a result of New Labour becoming Tory Lite. I think a lot of people are yearning for a genuine social democratic alternative.


Largely agree - that's certainly more or less how I see it, and a fair number of folk I know feel the same.Yet come election day that rarely seems to show in terms of the result, and I can't see that changing in the immediately foreseeable future.


"A new survey has found!"


Not the first time a survey's come up with that sort of thing, though, is it?And yet come the next election, more often that not the vote goes the way the vote usually goes.Like last May.


"most people (48 per cent) do not define themselves as either"In the last few years the Trade Union and Socialist Coalition candidates got about 2% of the vote where they stood.


TUSC got a grand total of 36,327 votes across the 128 constituencies where they stood and lost all their deposits. An average 283 votes per constituency is a lot less than 2% support.


This is why the Tories do everything they can to discourage the young from voting.


They don't have to do too much discouraging. I don't know how representative my circle of acquaintances are, but most of the 18 - 35s entitled to vote that I know take no noticeable interest in what goes on in Parliament, rarely if ever vote, and seem to be little bothered with political issues most of the time. That was far less the case when I was their age in the late '60s and '70s. Possibly - despite their intermittent laments - politicians don't mind too much, since apathy is likely to mean that the mainstream political status quo, with its predictable "Buggin's turn" of "Con>Lab>Con>Lab" on which they build their careers can carry on as usual.


