"EU laws cannot be initiated by our elected MEPs who are only a rubber stamp for the Commission."This is the claim made by people who like to be elected, get the salary and expenses and enjoy a bit of power back at home.The reality is that the suggested "laws" are put forward by the elected government ministers making up the Council of Ministers, locally elected MEPs and national government appointed Commissioners.There is no point in the entire process where a civil servant can make any law without discussion and voting in both the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament.


The UK fishing industry was "decimated" not by the EU - it was decimated by lack of fish and the loss of the Icelandic fishing grounds. A complete failure by successive British governments to enforce the laws which existed across EU countries to control over-fishing and the resultant depletion of fishing stocks is, yet again, an issue for the British government to answer for, not blame other countries who have to work under the exact same system.


Doesn't alter the fact that its the council of ministers who draft laws affecting our fishing rights.


Not sure whose claiming that 500 million number so lets move on.The EU thanks to Merkel will be giving EU passports to any migrant who manages to get into Europe as it is in her interests to do so. At the moment she's f***** herself as without passports they can't move around the EU but now things are hotting up in Germany and vigilantism is rearing its head again like the 1930's, if I were her, I hand out passports like candy just to get shot of many of the migrants to another EU country. Thats where the dangers are.


People seem to be blind to the fact that the EU is not another country, it is their own country. The UK is the 4th largest contributor to the EU budget - a budget that is agreed to by elected national government ministers, elected MEPs and nationally appointed commissioners. That budget is distributed according to the agreements reached, debated and voted on by those same elected politicians and merely administered by the employed civil servants - who are answerable to the elected national representatives at every stage.It is disingenuous to say that the EU is run by "faceless bureaucrats" when the civil servants that administer the wishes of the national governments and elected MEPs are merely doing the job they are paid to do. Bear in mind also that there are more civil servants administering Birmingham City Council, than there are in Brussels and Strasbourg, combined.


None of which fits the sceptics narrative. I have been posting such rebuttals for several years. It's a waste of time, they are not interested in facts... these people think (if that's the right word) in simple sound-bites, they approach the issue emotionally, not logically or factually.But keep up the good work. Quietism is not an option.. the default outcome of passivity is always tyranny.


"I have been posting such rebuttals for several years. It's a waste of time,".As have I. But, most of the time, I no longer engage with the petty-minded bigots that litter these comment sections. I just hope that non-commentators will happen to read what I write, follow the links I give and read other comments from people such as yourself who clearly understand how the world works rather better than they, and their political and media leaders, do.I have to admit to feeling more "non me ne frega" about what the UK do next though...


Perhaps if your 'facts' were the truth there wouldn't be a problem but they're not are they. Un-elected president of the EU for example !


If the facts were correct then fine, but I've rebutted her facts as being lies.


For which we have no say in electing the council of ministers nor the EU president unlike the USA. Thats the simple fact and you can't dispute it !


"EU has no army, navy or airforce" wow, I didn't know that (sarcasm) !!!!Then how did they expect to bring peace to the region as so many claim here ?You should face the truth 'sonny boy'


Is it ? I don't think you'll find anywhere in its aims that even mentions solving disputes and preventing war between any nations.


Yet, funny enough, as you demonstrated yourself by not being able to describe any conflicts between EC/EU members (aside from the bloodshed and horrors of the cod wars, of course), it works exactly that way."If goods don't cross borders, armies will" (Frederic Bastiat).


"Iain Duncan Smith's claims about the EU make no sense, Ken Clarke says" ?Too long-winded. Try this: Iain Duncan Smith makes no sense.


1 - Your doing a great job emulating Oedipus, keep it up !


I'm waiting for you to debate the message rather than shoot the messenger but I guess I'm in for a long wait !


Will IDS (I Despise Sick people) put himself forward to once again lead his Nasty Party? He would walk it!


All the senior Tories on the Out side are hoping to led their party.


2nd contender for emulating Oedipus, keep it up !


well seeing as todays headlines read that the EU is relaxing controls during the holiday season I would say that he was correct. free movement of citizens and migrants does put us more at risk of any form of terrorism just like the irish free movement agreement allowed the IRA to bomb the mainland with impunity when they wished to do so.


Plenty of IRA men were in, and from Northern Ireland, which is, I remind you, in the UK. As such, they could travel to GB and this would be classed as internal travel. If the UK government imposed passport restrictions on NI citizens travelling to GB, this would have infuriated the Ulster Unionists.


It was some of the EU countries that re-introduce border controls not the UK !


You have missed the point I was making to Dominic Hagan, which was a reference to the free movement between the UK and Ireland during the IRA campaign. I repeat - any passport controls between NI and GB would have been passport controls on INTERNAL UK travel. As Julia points out, that would be like the Soviet Union.


You need photo ID to go from the UK to Eire, and most use a passport so in practical terms you do need a passport. Even in the USA on internal flights you need a recognizable photo ID to get on a flight and as my US drivers license has a passport size picture, that will suffice. UK (EU) photo drivers licences are questionable due to the small size of the picture and I wouldn't trust that alone.


Very much like the Soviet Union.....yet not enough for the critics, apparently.Quite astonishing to see such arguments.


Yep until the next Paris style massacre and it will be Schengen dropped again.


I often wonder what the EU, and our membership of it, had to do with the London bus and underground bombings of July 2005, and the murder of Lee Rigby.Perhaps you can enlighten us?


