The Srvice is there to administer Government Policy, whatever that may be. It is Government policy to stay within the EU, therefore it would be highly innapropriate for the service to go counter to the policy. In addition the referendum is a Conservative Party political matter and the service is barred from doing anything political.There is much being spouted about "level playing fields" etc well the serice is being impartial, they would be doing the same if the roles had been reversed.


What a load of codswollop the Civil Service will be working flat out for Cameron and his EU stay cronies, smacks more to me like they are in infants school with Cameron saying I am the boss so either listen to me or you can not be in our gang and play with our toys.


People seem to be blind to the fact that the EU is not another country, it is their own country. The UK is the 4th largest contributor to the EU budget - a budget that is agreed to by elected national government ministers, elected MEPs and nationally appointed commissioners. That budget is distributed according to the agreements reached, debated and voted on by those same elected politicians and merely administered by the employed civil servants - who are answerable to the elected national representatives at every stage.It is disingenuous to say that the EU is run by "faceless bureaucrats" when the civil servants that administer the wishes of the national governments and elected MEPs are merely doing the job they are paid to do. Bear in mind also that there are more civil servants administering Birmingham City Council, than there are in Brussels and Strasbourg, combined.


The UK is the 2nd biggest net contributor to the EU's propaganda fund and EU bureaucrats couldn't be more faceless, tens of thousands of them with huge tax free salaries and gold plated pensions, making decisions that the elected British Government has to abide by.What a joke!


I hope anyone in the CS with Brexit sympathies does their best to impede the govts propaganda. Leaking documents would be a nice start.


My recollection of the GM crops affair is that the British public was distrustful and wary. It was recognition of this that led to the retrictions placed on their introduction.


Absolutely correct, they are there to implement the governments business and the government wants to remain in the Union.


