They don't give a damn about anything but profits facilitated by an endless supply of cheap labour. They are rubbing their hands at TTIP.


but two thirds are for brexit why not report that?


Tesco, Sainsbury's and Barclays do not operate in a big way, if at all, in Europe, so it it is irrelevant that they did not sign the letter.


Nor of course do M&S and most of the others. Very few export directly from the UK if at all. except for service companies.. The larger FTSE 100 have their own operating companies or JV's


As if his monster pension & fat bonus is in anyway likely to be affected by a Brexit. He's on a win-win like most of 'em. Vote Out and increase turnover to hit bonus targets,. Vote in and cut costs to hit bonus targets.


Comparing a free and independent UK to North Korea shows the threadbare paucity of your "argument ".


What a ridiculous comparison: the UK to North Korea.We will still be the world's fifth largest economy, eighth largest manufacturing nation and the EU's largest export market. We will still have visa-free access to most countries in the world. We will still be members of the UN, NATO, the WTO, the G8 and many other international bodies.Are China, the US and Russia isolated like North Korea too? Those are the three largest exporters into the EU. None of them has a bilateral trade treaty - it is all done under WTO rules.


It is ridiculous for these people to suggest that if we leave the EU millions of jobs will be lost and the economy will be at risk of collapse. Do they seriously think that after a leave vote Europe will stop buying British goods while BMWs and Renaults will suddenly disappear from UK showrooms and we'll wake up to find that Danish Bacon, Dutch cheese, French wine and Italian pasta have vanished from supermarket shelves?They know perfectly well that international trade will carry on regardless and is not dependent on political union or sacrifice of sovereignty - ask the rest of the world's independent nations who trade happily with Europe. Our so-called business leaders make themselves look foolish by peddling nonsense as though their customers and shareholders are idiots.


Correct and our default position is that agreed under the terms of WTO. The biggest threat to trade at the moment is the TTIP being signed off by the EU with the warning that we will need to subsidise those countries that will certainly lose jobs as a direct result. Quite incredible, and even more so that our government is supporting large corporations yet again by supporting TTIP


How is TTIP, which is a free trade agreement, a threat to trade exactly?


