PS. All that said, I do love socialism and social democracy, and never begrudge paying taxes, and felt very empowered by public universal education.Coming from ultima thule - the far north - I genuinely think that Fenno-Scandia would be immeasurably worse off today, but for labour movement and socialism/social democrats.It must be said though that in research of the Finnish labor movement, it was found that city laborers felt genuine solidarity with the country side workers, not least because this is whence they came. And it mattered in winning rights.With a lot of right won - paid leave, five days work week, pension, maternity pay, etc, this solidarity has tended to falter, a bit. But I think if we are to have societies, a continent even, of fairness and advancement, a counter-weight to neo-liberalism and austerity is overdue.


"Socialism 'more popular' with British public than capitalism". Yeah, right.Is that why the print edition of this very newspaper sells fewer than 60,000 copies and is closing down? Is that why Socialist Worker sells fewer than 8,000 copies?Is that why the Guardian is making horrendous losses and is only surviving thanks to its offshore trust fund and the BBC buying tens of thousands of copies every day to tell them what the news agenda is?


Well, Trinity Mirror still goes forth! Hope many will buy their new daily paper, for joy and respect. :-)I trust the circulation shall have diminished for "right wing" papers too. Only you want to somehow confuse the issue of digitization and "support for socialism." In case of Trinity Mirror - The New Day - it could be true, to your contrary. But also, I think there are a lot of us whom love a physical copy of a newspaper, and will feel that The New Day is just too bold and positive a launch to be ignored!


Daily Telegraph: 479,000The Times: 391,000Financial Times: 213,000Guardian: 175,000Independent: 59,000Not much evidence of left wing newspapers being more popular there, notwithstanding digitisation, is there?


It is not that more people find Socialism more attractive merely that Dodgy Dave and Gidiot make Capitalism so damned unattractive except for the top few. This is reinforced by the utter despicable behaviour of our fraudster MPS and blatantly unfair electoral system that does not reflect the aspirations of the electorate and makes them believe their vote is wasted. 


"British people prefer socialism to capitalism, a new survey has found."Curious, then, that they so rarely choose to vote in a way that accords with these findings.


There hasn't been a socialist alternative offered to the electorate in the last 25 years. Now that the world economy is teetering on another recession perhaps a socialist programme will be relevant. If we could build enough social/affordable houses with a "green" agenda that would stimulate jobs and scientific research to make Britain a world leader. It is crazy that the gap in wealth and opportunity has widened to leave the vast majority of the UK population struggling from one month to the next.


Largely agree with that - not least the last sentence!Nevertheless the last time that UK voters wholeheartedly opted for anything really resembling "a socialist alternative" was 1945. You can't count 1997 because Blair achieved that victory on the back of a ludicrously divided Tory party, and on a strategy of denying that Labour was still socialist.


"There hasn't been a socialist alternative offered to the electorate in the last 25 years."Rubbish. TUSC put up 128 candidates last May. They got a grand total of 36,327 votes. An average of 283 votes per constituency. They lost all their deposits.There is no army of Socialist voters sitting at home just waiting for a politically reliable comrade to stand. You're living in a dreamworld.


A government that is formed on a 24% proportion of the vote is an unqualified mandate for capitalism? I don't think so. It is an iniquity of the FPTP electoral system and a result of New Labour becoming Tory Lite. I think a lot of people are yearning for a genuine social democratic alternative.


Largely agree - that's certainly more or less how I see it, and a fair number of folk I know feel the same.Yet come election day that rarely seems to show in terms of the result, and I can't see that changing in the immediately foreseeable future.


"A new survey has found!"


Not the first time a survey's come up with that sort of thing, though, is it?And yet come the next election, more often that not the vote goes the way the vote usually goes.Like last May.


"most people (48 per cent) do not define themselves as either"In the last few years the Trade Union and Socialist Coalition candidates got about 2% of the vote where they stood.


TUSC got a grand total of 36,327 votes across the 128 constituencies where they stood and lost all their deposits. An average 283 votes per constituency is a lot less than 2% support.


okay pal. Its time to take your medicine now.


