The disparity between party support and general public is in large part due to the savagery with which the establishment media have maligned him.


He's got star quality. No-one else comes close.


Joey Essex equally has "star quality" and would have equal competence as PM with Corbyn


Judging by your comment, maybe you are the real Joey Essex.


I was about to think ...you've got to be joking, and then I saw the words "labour members"


The sheeple are over breeding.


Is there ANYTHING you could say constructively about Corbyn?


Er, to where?


I agree that TTIP is a dangerous development. Corbyn is a protest politician and as such has never and will never stop this or anything else. Being in the EU gives us some protection from the US, being out means we effectively become the US's 51st state. We will sign up to anything Uncle Sam says we have to including war. No especially war.


The SWP never worry about figures. Just packing out meetings on a Friday night at 19.00 when every one else wants to go home.


And your evidence for mass public support is? Even the labour party (well its the communist party right now) states the vast majority of it's new membership are from London alone - every other area of the country has seen a drastic REDUCTION in membership! But keep telling yourself that Tooting and Balham represent the entire country - it will make the losses in May even more humiliating for you!


It's because Corbyn has principles and the other don't.


Are you for real?


Really? His principles has disappeared rapidly! You seem to forget for DECADES he has been AGAINST the EU and has stated he supports leaving NOT staying! He LIED about apologising for Iraq, and he LIED about ending Trident! You are truly ridiculous!


Oh yes and didn't he go OUT OF HIS WAY to state that he would accept dissent from his cabinet? That lasted all the way up to the very first vote - when he sacked everyone he could for dissent!Man of principles? a "man" utterly LACKING ANY PRINCIPLES!


You should start by asking Mr Cameron just how reliable believing in what polls and focus groups tell you is public opinion. Why make excuses for those who said for those who would not vote its pretty clear their intentions. The bottom line is the public dont like him and at the end of the day those are the people who count "literally."He has weird views on brexit shooting down Camerons deal as a sideshow while ignoring the real signifigance of remaining in the EU. They are well on the way to agreeing with the USA over TTIP which bizarrely gives big business executives the equal rights to draft and have input into EU legislation plus benefit from massive fines if particular EU laws hurt trheir businesses.Workers rights will be circumvented to become irrelevant under this TTIP implentation as the needs of those who run it take priorityBrexit is the only way of stopping this nightmare


You do realise that the UK have joined in with the negotiations? Even if we left we would still join TTIP the only way to stop it is European wide condemnation


No the US are desperate to get their hands on the NHS .... Remove the cherry and the US is not so keen on TTIP....Vote LEAVE


TTIP would leave the US owning us, no matter if we were in the EU or not. Cameron, Boris, Gideon, etc are even more pro TTIP that the rest of the EU.


You obviously don't understand the TTIP very well!


Not at all! Remember it is likely if we are out, we will have a new prime minister! There will be a different agenda!


All the more reason to leave! It is DISGRACEFUL that the BBC has not released ANY statements as to why we should leave. This is getting as biased as the US "news" channels!


