Good!


If the health Minister thinks it is a fair deal and they should take it, Does that mean HE will take the same pay as the Jnr doctors? or even the senior doctors??? NO DIDN'T THINK SO.


he is not a Dr but an MP. They can have a go at being one if they like in the democracy in which we live. it is open the them to do this and some have.duh brain


Everybody come out and show this dictatorship that they cannot win with their bullying tactics, bring the buggers down


Hear! Hear!


And what about the indolent, incompetent trotskyest scum who shirk in the nhs denying the sick even water to their patients and lie their way out of trouble because their afraid to expose their "co-workers"


'their afraid'?....FO and learn to spell...rightwingnut!


yes a typo is so much MORE important than (say) North Staffs killing hundreds of peoplehe must be right wing and nutty to even think thatactually just thinking makes you right wing when it comes the the staff in the NHS


You have written the twice flimflam


This comment is awaiting moderation


you silly little turd.....fo!


Too much foam.


The TTIP that the government refuses to discuss in public....even through freedom of information requests is a DIRECT THREAT to the NHS. It is a tool that private GREEDY investors from all parts of the world...mainly USA will use to rip open the NHS for privatisation...all with the help of THIS SCUM GOVT AND THE EU!Be very very careful how you use your referendum vote....and be even more aware of this sly treasonous sneaky conniving scheming tory scum that want us to stay in!


NOTHING to do with the EU. The NHS can be easily be removed from the TTIP negotiations if Cameron wants. He doesn't want... he wants to flog it: he hates the public sector.


Sadly that is true, but we still need to be in there to stop the advance of the US and Canada into Europe, else Britain will be left isolated


I have to disagree. The EU are pushing TTIP very hard so voting in will doom the NHS - Cameron has already said this is all we get folks...so voting in kills the NHS, which is why I am so surprised most labour MPs back the remain vote.Also if you look at the Europa site you will find that laws already exist which prevent the UK (and any other country) from any renationisation of any industry , in particular the railways.Voting remain in the EU gets us TTIP and all that brings. That is a very scary thought.


Laws are not meant for hiding behind. I doubt very much whether the EU has the power to stop re-nationalisation. What are they going to do? Chuck as out? They'd have to invent a mechanism to do so, since none exists at the moment.I'd rather go to battle over our railways that over the take-home pay of a few Romanian pea-pickers.


