Pity she opts for such a one-sided representation of what John McDonnell is proposing - she might have been tempted to get on board. I refer, for example, to a piece John  published in the Guardian last November which seems to contradict her "yesterday's solutions to tomorrows problems narrative:http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/19/john-mcdonnell-labour-technology-tax-economy-of-future


Singapore started out as socialist when it became independent. When they found some policies didn't work they junked them. No clinging to dogma there.


It's increasingly my belief that New labour was an entryist ploy by an establishment cabal intended to ( and succeeding ) damage the Labour Party from within. They are still determined to do their worst.


Don't worry people became disillusioned with Labour back in the early sixties.


Tell that to their new membership.


Well yes they had Spring and Summer in the GDR.


If you can't come up with anything better than tired old 'Daily Mailism's then stick to ranting down the pub... 


Really? That's odd? The Tories were in power then, as they had been since the mid 50's. Labour won power in 1964, so that doesn't really tally with your comment now does it? 


3rd place leadership candidate Yvette Cooper thinks that Labour should "move beyond" the most popular policy with the entire electorate.World keeps on spinnin'.


Cooper's talking crap as usual. If most of Europe can have a nationalised railway network, then so can we. She's obviously quite happy for foreign state owned railways to own our railways and make a profit from them. Despicable.


What are you getting at Old Dissentry?


"Those who do not learn history are doomed to repeat it."


Exactly. Then pray tell why people like you voted in a Tory party hell bent on destroying our society in order to enrich themselves and small coterie of their wealthy pals? 


Really? How come we have a nationalised French power company EDF successfully running UK power stations, and bizarrely, your old mates the 'commies' from China are soon to be running some of our Nuclear stations? The UK govt seems happy to allow all sorts of foreign, govt run, suppliers to run our utilities but not UK ones. Which makes about as much sense as a chocolate teapot. You do walk into these things don't you? 


What needs to be considered is what has happened to the former nationalised industry's gas, water, electric, post office, railways? All have charges have gone up above inflation; all pay chief executives get very high wages All also provide a bad service and fail to invest. I suggest she get out of the Westminster Bubble and knocks on a few doors to speak  to ordinarily people about the costs they are bearing and cannot afford. I actually know of people eating cold food from tins because they cannot afford to turn their cookers on!


