I doubt Churchill envisaged the UK simply becoming a region of the superstate.


Churchill expected the UK to lead a strong and continuing Empire. When actually we were bankrupt after WW II so most members left, dumped Sterling and switched to the $.May happen to the EU should rest of world trade become the dominant  proportion. But that's for the future. 


Er, yes Churchill did suggest European countries should work more closely together, he was though very specific that Britain should not be involved in the process.


Both Johnson and Gove in focusing on Sovereignty, in effect conveniently and purposefully provide the Government with a useful argument to counter. The Leave campaigns thereby are left exposed to their main weakness of  not yet providing a convincing vision of the UK economy after Brexit.  Clever politics by Cameron's cabinet strategy. 


It opens up a serious debate on the legalities, nothing more !


GDP per head depends largely on the UK continuing to be attractive to inward FDI. Recently the trend has been a slight deterioration with excess of outward FDI. That trend may continue were there to be Brexit.


Not too sure of your point re sovereignty, 41. It's quite simple; stay in and give up all remaining vestiges of sovereignty as it's full speed ahead towards the superstate, or leave and make your own laws, control your borders, etc.


Cameron's renegotiation secured an opt out from the EZ. The laws we don't make ourselves are those required by trading in a customs union i.e. tariff free, but our commissioner, MEPs and PM represent our interests.All trade deals are a compromise with sovereignty.


you are very confused, totally fcking stupid would be closer to the point.An illegal agreement is not an agreement - cant even the dumb like you see that?


When Cameron goes to Brussels, Schultz puts his pig costume on.


the other way around


The Netherlands and Croatia will be next with Referenda.


People seem to be blind to the fact that the EU is not another country, it is their own country. The UK is the 4th largest contributor to the EU budget - a budget that is agreed to by elected national government ministers, elected MEPs and nationally appointed commissioners. That budget is distributed according to the agreements reached, debated and voted on by those same elected politicians and merely administered by the employed civil servants - who are answerable to the elected national representatives at every stage.It is disingenuous to say that the EU is run by "faceless bureaucrats" when the civil servants that administer the wishes of the national governments and elected MEPs are merely doing the job they are paid to do. Bear in mind also that there are more civil servants administering Birmingham City Council, than there are in Brussels and Strasbourg, combined.


A Federally controlled system with a controlled exchange rate dissolves 'Your Country' in an instant, as many have slowly come to realise.


Chaired by an un-elected president and controlled by a council of ministers !


Jean-Claude Juncker was the candidate put forward for the Presidency of the Commission by the EPP at the last European Election. They got the most votes then he was appointed President. Rather more democratic than the Queen or House of Lords.


Or the Prime and other Ministers of the UK Government, all of whom are nominated by the Queen. 


Ask Greece and the Merkel/Franco banks.


The parasites are the ones printing all those s**t euros, mario (printer) draghi >> amongst others they are mostly ex goldman sachs. They run the banking system, so manipulate it to achieve their ends.


by the way, if you think this is falling like a stone now, look back in Aug 2011 when sterling lost 54% of it's value against the Swiss franc (12% in ONE DAY!!) and not a word was mentioned, sick b...tards control & own everything


Currencies always wing during uncertain periods.


A lot more than EU.


Then nor do the host of EU mandarins who have made the same observation as Gove.The Heads of State in Europe have no power to make law without ratification from their parliaments. Even on the best agument that Cameron has a deal (I argue that he has no firm deal since the detail isn't agreed, unless, of course, he will capitulate on everything), then it is with those Heads of State alone.You can also consult Tusk's own letter which makes it clear that this is a 'proposed' deal. Odd language indeed if it is set in stone, don't you think.


The fact that Cameron states that the Court should 'take (the agreement) into account' should be enough to tell you that it isn't binding.


There was a US Vice President who once described that role as 'worth no more than a bucket full of spit'. That epithet describes aptly Mr Cameron's recent EU achievments.


