D.C. shows us yet again, what an empathetic, caring and thoughtful member of the community he is. 


I hope people can see that rather than answer questions Cameron is reduced to sneering, vulgar name calling backed by a chorus of braying bystanders. The type of thing normally associated with the school bully. To be fair, I'd go for principals rather than a sharp suit every time.


Dress sense? Cameron needs to have his suits let out a bit as he's becoming fatter and fatter. He's obviously attending far too many dinners and eating the spuds instead of concentrating on the less fattening vegetables.He should be called 'Fatty Arbuckle' or 'Potato Face' if he is rude about others' 'dress sense' ever again.


All things being equal, wont people be less concerned with dress sense...than David Camerons pugilistic attitude and experience of jolly japes with pigs #pigsGate?


I don't quite understand why political commentators are able to claim that Cameron had the best of PMQs. He made an absolutely unworthy, below-the-belt offensive comment about Corbyn. Such loutish, thuggish tactics lost him the argument instantly - or at least would in a sane world. We in the UK get the politicians we deserve, and our politicians on the Tory benches are bullying, heckling jeering simpletons whose behaviour would disgrace a parish council, never mind the Mother of Parliaments.


Labour in the gutter again by bringing Camerons mother into PMQs . Corbyn deserved everything he got by sinking so low .


To be fair Cameron's mother brought herself into it by supporting petitions criticising her son's policies.If he can't get his own mother to support him....


Cameron is, indeed, misleading the House.Even on the best interpretation that he has a deal, which he actually does not since the detail isn't agreed, the Heads of State do not have power to make law without ratification.So, any agreement which he has with the Heads of State alone is not binding on the EU.Furthermore, his assertion that the Court must 'take (the agreement) into account' should be sufficient to prove to anybody that this is not enshrined.


