Christian convert attacked in BradfordFri 20 Nov 2015By Hannah TooleyA man who converted from Islam to Christianity has been attacked in an alleged religious hate crime.The father of six, Nissar Hussain, 49, was attacked by men in Bradford.He was said to have been hit 13 times with a pickaxe handle and punched and kicked - his kneecap and hand was broken.Police say that the incident on Tuesday evening is being looked into and are calling the crime a religious hate crime.However, according to The Times Mr Hussain said that the police have not protected him in previous years.The British-born nurse converted to Christianity in 1996 but said that problems began in 2008 when his family appeared in a Channel 4 documentary, Holy War, about how Muslim converts are treated.Following the programme the family relocated, claiming strict Muslims had caused their move.Mr Hussain claims that he and his family are now prisoners in their own home.


Well, she and they would say that, wouldn't they?But the disenchantment with the HR act stems from the obvious abuse that it has lent itself to. Rapists and murderers who can claim a "right" to family life in the UK after having destroyed the family life of others, rabble rousers with or without hooks who could only be deported after many years, allowing them to preach abject ideologies.A law that can be abused in that way is a bad law, however good the intentions. Replacing it with a British Bill of Rights, informed by the problems thrown up by the HR act, could be a good idea.


The European Convention on Human Rights is a completely separate institution to the EU. The UK was in fact a founder of the ECHR and we signed it in 1950, long before we ever joined the EEC/EU. Leaving the EU will do nothing to change that. It astounds me how wilfully ignorant and uninformed you Europhobes are! I can't believe you're even being allowed to vote on our EU membership when you clearly don't even have a grasp of basic facts.


If that kind of basic knowledge were a requirement then 90% of the electorate would be disenfranchised.


Never underestimate the power of stupid people in large groups.


The UK is a threat to human rights? Have they gone mad?


Yes, because of it nobody wants to come here.......Doh!


Overall the HRA 1998 reduced my right to live in safety and further legislation by the Blair govt reduced my right to freedom of speech.I will feel happier and safer if the HRA is scrapped.


1. No it didn't 2. You're an idiot.


Being insulting does not help your case.


Being a tw@ doesn't help his case.


Yes, it did, ugly.You are a smelly idiot.


I'm more concerned about not going back to 730 AD and the rapid decline of equal rights for both sexes and all sexual orientations. Still not an issue for virtue signalers braying their sanctimonious nonsense.


Yes, what saints they are. Is there a St Sanctimonious Waffler?


Have you noticed, refugees are not fleeing to Muslim countries that offer safety, but rather to Western countries that have  a generous welfare system? 


According to a major report by a UK think tank, Amnesty International is setting an extremely dangerous precedent by promoting the rights of criminals over honest citizens, encouraging the spread of cross-border terrorism through uncontrolled migration and attempting to prevent governments acquiring the necessary weapons and intelligence resources to fight against atrocities committed by terrorists.The report concludes that such naivety is 'profoundly regrettable' and is a gift to thugs and murderers the world over by undermining our ability to properly protect the safety and well-being of our the vast majority of our citizens.


Amnesty doesn't have to pay the financial and social and cultural costs of mass immigration by people with no connection to this country, its culture and its habits.


Amnesty doesn't bomb their homes


The people of this country do not bomb their homes.


