How many of the Euro sceptics who seem to be reluctantly saying they'll vote to stay will actually bother to go to the polling booths?


Look at Kinnock, Blair and discard, 2 leeches and the most stupid bit of legislation ever put down on paper.If you vote to stay in you are as Del would say "a total plonker" I would have added mindless as well.


When did they actually poll two thirds of the electorate, because nobody's asked me yet. Please stop these scare tactics, they're just transparent codswallop until people actually vote.


He meant economically, you fool.Economic security and personal job safety and prospects as a result.No-one really believes that EU membership implies strategic defence security, least of all Cameron.The EU is not about that. Wake up.


"Fool". Haha.You're incredibly naive if you think he's bandying words like 'security and safety' and talking purely in economic terms when he makes these speeches. Anyway, anyone with half a brain can see that the EU represents the opposite of economic safety, security and certainty - i.e. - bailouts, massive unemployment throughout the union, Euro crisis after crisis, 0 growth etc etc...


All it really needs is backbone this country used to have it but it seems to have gone for many.


This headline is what really scares me about the referendum. I think a a lot of Eurosceptics will vote to remain simply because of the 'better the devil you know' mentality. What sort of way is that to decide the fate of our great nation? Why are people so afraid us running our own country?Safety - NATO ensures safety in Europe. The EU is a military minnow. We're NATO allies with European countries, so can still share intelligence. Currently as an EU country, we share most intelligence with the US anyway.Business - Leaving the EU will affect some UK businesses negatively, but it will also affect others positively. We will still trade with the EU because we buy more off them than they do off us. Why are there no European Facebooks, Googles or Amazons? Because the union is mired in red tape. Outside that, we can become globalists again and thrive with faster-growing and more dynamic trade partners.History - The UK has been a global nation for centuries, yet the EU restricts us to focusing on Europe alongside uncompetitive trade with non-EU countries. Outside the EU, we can re-establish strong links with the Commonwealth, the Anglosphere and other countries.


What are you on about?The EU has very little to nearly nothing do with national security in relation to the UK. Whether we're in or out of it.


Have a read of what I wrote before you respond.


Many people decide to remain in employment that they're far from happy with, many people choose to remain in marriages or partnerships that are far from healthy. For what?, if it makes you sick then it 'aint worth it. Change such circumstances and you may have less in certain aspects for a time but in the long-run you would likely to be vindicated and happier with your situation. Depends on whether you can stomach the upheaval though.


Weak justification of 'change for the sake of change', the long standing justification for attention deficit.


You're reading me wrong there, there's a deficit of attention on your part,- 'change for the sake of change' would be because you were bored or fickle.I'm suggesting change with purpose because the status quo isn't right and might prove unhealthy as felt by the majority, but they'll still vote for the same ol' same ol' in case the price of eggs goes up, or maybe people just feel too dizzy with what they've already got on their plate (if they can't afford a P.A.) to contemplate any upheaval.I'd rather try living in a real (or as close to) democracy.


Crossing a road is a risk but you have to do it to reach the other side Roll on Brexit!


