Time to bring backLord and Lady KinnockLord and Lady Prescottthey all love Bevan.


Dai Bevan would be turning in hisgrave.If he seen who was sitting in hisseat.


Nye bevans wife jennie Lee was also a remarkable woman. I am reading her biography at the moment. I recommend it. Jennie Lee - a life.


What's the point without answers?


What do you think Bevan would have said about Tony Blair?


That was in the days whenlabour had a cause.


Really? You think someone who stated NHS should be at the benefit of all would have appreciated the labour party making life easy for doctors at the expense of patients? YOu think he would have approved of the labour party crippling the NHS with debt through PFIs just so they could cover up the mess they were making to the economy?SPARE me you hate filled rants! The NHS wouldn't even be in this mess had they not resisted ANY improvements to a system that was designed in the 40's but is no longer able to meet the demands!The population has nearly doubled, drugs are increasingly more expensive, nurses now need degrees just to change sheets!Yet idiots like you think the NHS can still run as if it is the 40's! Name ONE other organisation that has NEVER modernised it's infrastructure and survived!You people are a true SICKNESS! Instead of rejecting ANY improvements - OFFER advice - or shut your cakeholes. Frankly you people are the cause of the problems NOT the cure!


Cameron went down the gutter during Question Time. He cannot face the facts so went on personal attacks about Corbyn dress. Does this stupid liar fit to be our PM?


Really? You watched a different question time! Corbyn lost it BIG time. So much for the "kinder" politics" I thought he was never going to try cheap attacks!It is Corbyn who is a disgrace - because he is a HYPOCRITE


Never trust a politician who refuses to support his "own" party!


Just a shame he hasn't got a proper suit and tie and can't sing the national anthem.Phnarr.


He does look like he's going to cry though.


Ah Bless did the nasty man get to you Corbyn? If you cannot handle such softballs, you really shouldn't be in politics! Even Tom Watson tried to stifle a laugh at the suit jibe! You look like Mr Bean up there - You want to be PM - look and act like a PM not one of Harry Enfield's old gits!


yes because the sign of a good pm is a designer suit.... idiot


It's government not Playschool. It costs billions for them to be there. Behave Dave!


Jose Murica, Uruguay kind of dispels your theory.


It was a clean suit and tie. What was the problem, the colour of the suit? The beard?


Wow you like a "man" who claimed to bring in a newer kinder politics, who PROMISED to allow dissent then immediately sacked virtually all his dissenters at eh first chance! He is DESPERATE because he is so despised by every SANE person in this country!He is like you a complete joke


The Mother of Parliaments is a Punch and Judy show, devoid of the humour.


You're kidding right - that was hilarious. Watching Corbyn fight back - it's like watching someone be savaged by a wet lettuce.


