New Delhi:                             President Pranab Mukherjee arrived at Parliament House today in a six-horse chariot and, in a 20-page speech, reminded members of the two houses of Parliament that they owe their presence there to the "supreme will of the people."
"Democratic temper calls for debate and discussion, and not disruption or obstruction," he said. Parliament business has been continuously disrupted by a belligerent opposition over the last few sessions and the government is going flat out to ensure the Budget session does not go the same way.
The President's speech to a joint sitting of both houses at the start of the Budget session is prepared by the government and lists its achievements and plans. It is also seen as a preview to how the year's Union Budget will be focused.
 
Today President Mukherjee spoke at length about the farm sector and attempts to better the condition of the poor by improving the economic climate. It is seen an indication that Finance Minister Arun Jaitley may focus on the farm sector and build on initiatives like crop insurance and irrigation schemes in the Union Budget he will present on Monday next.
The other strong theme of the President's speech was improving access for the poor to sanitation, liveable homes and cities, banking, cleaner trains, electricity and health facilities - signs that the Budget could also see greater emphasis on the social sector.
There was also the hint of a shift from big economic reforms to bread and butter measures that make doing business easier and help people enter the world of business. The address listed no big bills or reform moves, but steps initiated to make daily life in business easier. The President spoke about repealing archaic laws, easing rules for start-ups and easier loans under the government's Mudra scheme and the Make in India priority.
The Narendra Modi government is seen to have shifted strategy after the opposition successfully tagged it as a "suit boot ki sarkar (or government for the corporates)." The ruling BJP assesses this cost it the Bihar assembly elections in November, with the farm voter rejecting the party. It faces elections in nine states in the next year.                 

