Nooo. We must follow Jeremy's lead and understand WHY these people feel compelled to act like this!! We should engage with them and put ourselves in their place! Isn't that right, Jezzer?


Suck ficks


Ancient story covered months ago by the Mail, a superior paper to the 'dependant, - However the real story is this woman has not renounced Islam and rescued her kids from the Vile cult.


Who cares? That's just how muslims treat women. If they don't like it they shouldn't be muslims.


They'd say you were talking b**##*%ks. I never yet saw an Irish woman wrapped up in a black bag.


"Black and Tans....over a century ago". If you were Irish at all you'd know that the 'Tans didn't exist in 1916. They were a feature of the Independence War. More reading, less uninformed writing matey. Then again, maybe your grandfather was IN the 'Tans, which would explain your lack of knowledge about Irish history.


It's a life style choice not a nationality


Can we use this on the idiots who go out there and the preachers who persuade them?


Islamic women should get everything that is coming to them. Torture. Degradation. No rights. No control.They peddle this religious nonsense to their little children. The children grow up and become men. The men are ignorant barbarians. What part of this process do they not understand?They should absolutely expect 'the biter', as christian women should have absolutely expected the 'scolds bridle' 500 years ago.


Pig -ignorant racists out in force.


Yep. Who could possibly have any problems with this religion? Boggles the mind doesn't it!


The Koran tells Muslims to kill no believers! What a screwed up book that is. Written by people years after Mohammed died. So likely ,therefore to be inaccurate, Remember too he spent years on his own in the desert. Ask any psychiatrist what that can do to the human brain. He was delusional hearing voices etc.


Identify the race of people I am hostile to - you cannot because I and the others are not racists - we are anti islam


What race would that be? All I see is a story about lunatic ghost botherers in fancy dress


my dogs a biter too. sometimes i wrap him in my dressing gown and he looks like isis women. i think that why he bites


why not someone like this. it spiderman dressing gown


There is nothing in Islam which says a woman must be completely covered in this way including the hands. The Quran just says moderate dress. And lets stop overthrowing secular dictators and setting up these groups then we wouldn't be seeing these nutters taking control.


You might be okay with sitting on your hands while a genocidal maniac mass murders a million people but many people aren't.I assume you're talking about Saddam Hussein because he's the only one 'we', as an international coalition, overthrew. Don't try and lump Gadaffi in there as well. Our military intervention in Libya was in response to a direct request for military assistance from the Libyan people.What has really changed since Saddam? Women seem to be treated worse but has Islamic State executed anywhere near a million people? No. An argument can still be made that our involvement improved things.People are quick to forget a monster, it seems.


Those Libyans that you say had requested you to liberate them were influenced by the west to rise up. Life under Gadaffi and Saddam was a lot better than what it is now. The world would be a lot better place if your govt stopped supporting terrorists , in the giuse of moderate oppositions, and selling arms to dictators like the Saudis.


Gadaffi threatened to bomb his own people if they did not stop complaining, so that was OK if he bombed them in your eyes I suppose . They rose up if you remember after a Tunisian student set himself on fire, Tunisia got a new president but the rest fared less well & in Syria they are still suffereing up to this day.So it is OK if these despots kill their own but no one should get involved to help is that it. I bet you would not think the same if it was you who was being bombed.


I lived in Libya and they were desperate for a change! But they did not know that fellow Muslims would help to destroy their dreams of freedom.


OK, well we in the UK, USA and Australia are similarly asking, by direct request, for "rebels" to rid us of the totalitarian sham democratic regimes set up by the 1%. I'm sure you'll see the rationale in that too and support the rebels in our emancipation - Thank you!


He had 9 wives, stupid mother"""


More than nine, wasn't it? He collected women (and children) like trophies because he liked f***ing them but held them in contempt.


Mohammed was a paedophile why follow this mentally ill weirdo


Please don't turn this into another Islam bashing thread. I believe Gym when he says that full covering is not in the Koran.I do take issue with his description of Saddam Hussein as a 'secular dictator', though. Like he was a reasonable man who just happened to be a bit authoritarian. He was a mass murdering monster.I don't see why people find this fact so easy to forget. It's as though some think there would be rainbows over Mosul now, with unicorns prancing through the streets, if only we had keep our noses out.


Firstly, I take issue with your 'over 1,000,000' figure. It may be true that this amount has died in violent confrontations but the idea that the coalition directly killed that many Iraqis is not true.Also, there's a world of difference between deaths occurring as a result of war and mass murder. We did not line thousands of people up next to mass graves and shoot them execution-style. That kind of activity, which Saddam was famous for, just does not stand by any reasonable code of morality. It has to be stopped, and that's what we did.


The crimes of the Arab Islamic Empire dwarf all other Empires in it's devastation of other cultures and the complete conversion of all those conquered. Angry Old Man and the hidden Muftis of the corner shop minds are here like NumeroUno in deflecting all attention to the erroneous excuse that the west and it's civilisation is to blame for the Islamic outward and inward violence .


'genocidal maniac mass murders a million people'Blair/Bush?


Get your facts right. He had only seven.


two were kept undergrownd though


No, that was the maximum age of any of them. He was too insecure to try to deal with a woman


So why do they do it? Koran nonsense can mean anything to anyone. Not the word of God but drivel of the devil


