I absolutely abhor the Establishment and the contempt they have for the ordinary working class voter..So stuff em.. Go Donny Go Go Go 


I am more depressed at the idea of the egomaniac Hillary as President than I am at Trump.She is just as self-obsessed as he. She is a socialist. That will do for the American economy, as Brown and his nexus with the city and loathing of the power of the individual did for England.


sieg heil


We need a Trump in Britain to defend us against the Muslim invasion.


The UK could use more Muslims. It might put a stop to the man-hating articles for one.Men are adored in Islamic cultures. Not hated.


So, if I follow your logic closely, we need somebody who will change his policies from those he believes in to those which will gain him votes, to defend people against rather luckless people trying to escape a civil war, where one well-armed insurgent group is slaughtering any who fail to be like themselves. 


"a full three quarters of voters described themselves as born-again evangelicals"That's scary!


Is the large majority of people in Muslim countries who want Sharia law, with the killing of apostates and homosexuals and chopping off thieves' hands scary too? Or is that different, because "it's their culture"?Foolish as born-again evangelicals seem to you and me, they do not want to make the whole world Christian by the sword if necessary. It is a different scale of scary.


Trump on course to become POTUS.That is excellent news.


For whom, exactly? Unlike his competitors, unpleasant or otherwise, he has tacked in whichever way would garner votes; we have no way of knowing which of his policies would remain should he become President. To my mind, he is a most unworthy candidate.


More walls and fewer muslims.That is excellent news.


is your religion any better ?


no religion is better. they are all based on imaginary friends, but its great for controlling people....


"...he has tacked in whichever way would garner votes; we have no way of knowing which of his policies would remain should he become President."And politicians of other parties in countries right across the globe don't do exactly the same?Come on, be reasonable!In politics, that is par for the course. As my dear old mum sometimes says - quoting her grandmother, which is going back a while - "Politicians' promises are like pie crusts: they're meant to be broken."Rightly or wrongly, it was true back then, and it's true now.I have my own phrase for what I quoted from you; I call it 'blowing in the wind'.Who first said, "British jobs for British workers?" eh? Well, that was the BNP. Who said it next? Gordon Brown. And who said it after that? Nigel Farage.In fact - 'fact' being a word I very rarely use unless I'm sure of what I'm saying - much of what is taking place across the predominantly white countries in Europe, and in the USA, IS politicians bending in the wind to reflect the concerns of right-wing voters.The only thing that you can be fairly sure of is that this or that politician or party is likely to veer to a certain set of policies; asking for specifics prior to the outcome of the vote is utterly pointless.


There were questions about how Hillary Clinton's campaign team won that 'narrow victory' over Bernie Sanders in the Nevada caucus, especially since the results are not possible to audit. Sanders was down 40 points to Clinton there, just a few months ago.


Like the EU Referendum Remain campaign, bankrolled by Goldman Sachs.


Yeah, she's bought and paid for, and I expect that most Americans know that.Trump, on the other hand, is too wealthy to be bought by anyone, and most Americans know that as well.


