If he wins the GOP nomination, Trump deserves the thanks of every sensible, rational, moderate, democracy and rule-of-law-loving person in America and beyond, because he's ensured that the REAL loonies - eg Carson and (especially) Cruz - are kept far, far away from the levers of power, and that we'll almost certainly have another 4 years of Democrat presidency. Trump himself is a charlatan, a chameleon who'll say pretty much anything, often completely off-the-cuff - but he has no serious ideas or policies, and he's already alienated more than half of the electorate he'd need to win to become POTUS (including many on the Republican side). He's also illustrated how desperately, fundamentally riven and hate-filled the Republican Party really is.


I agree with Suited72, Trump is just speaking whats said in the real world and he's addressing the real issues ordinary folks are concerned about, and what current politicians are not dealing with (or refuse to acknowledge). Whether or not Trump actually wins, his role in the U.S election can only be good for politics worldwide. We more people like him to speak their real mind.


You are right about the racist thing. I have said many times that when a leftie calls you a racist these days its a sure sign that you are anything but. The term has been so abused by the idiots that they have disarmed themselves.


Only the stupid and the gullible believes what any politician says.


Fascinating rant! One tiny point - imports from China, overweening influence of multinationals and western involvement in wars in the Middle East are nothing to do with lefties, PC or liberalism, and everything to do with the neocon capitalism which the US, including Trump, has enthusiastically embraced since Reagan. But don't let that stop your delusional paranoid stream of consciousness, it's very entertaining...


The man's a dangerous fool.


Get a load of the people here calling Trump a 'fool', 'idiot' etc! He's the one successfully running for US president and has $10bn in the bank, while most of you reprobates are lying there in your 3-day-old underpants with pie-crumbs all down your front.


Anyone will be better than Obama, all strength to Trumps' cause.


Typical racist Tea Party rethorics...


Probably the nerds 'rethorics' what ever they are.


Rhetorics are small furry animals that can be trained to bark 'racist' on command. (A bit like Socialists in that respect).


I have said many times that when a leftie calls you a racist these days its a sure sign that you are anything but. The term has been so abused by you idiots that you have disarmed yourselves. Your comment is the perfect example. 


I can't wait to see Trump as president of USA and Boris as P.M of U.K. It really could happen folks!


Another racist Tea Party rethorics...


Noodle. Are your 'rethorics giving you a problem?


He probably doesn't feed them properly. A free range rhetoric needs at least two meals a day and plenty of fresh drinking water.


Cue send in the clowns.You must be a sadist if you want to see that.


A while ago, British politicians were debating whether or not Mr Trump should be banned from entering Britain.The nightmare scenario for Britain would be for this to happen, and although unlikely, Donald becomes the most powerful man in the world next January. This, just months after the British people have voted to leave the EU (please God!).Way back in the 90's, the Tories allegedly donated a large sum of money to Bush Snr's campaign, which Bill Clinton duly won. This poisoned the "special" relationship for a while!Although Donald is a brilliant businessman, I don't think he is presidential material.


Well said andrew65...


I certainly hope so. He's a total nut case, but he's self funding his campaign so he's his own nut case and not in the pockets of vested interests like every other American politician.


If he is look out for some serious brown nosing from British politicians.


