Trump for President


The Pope was right. Trump is a thrice-married, adultery committing, build a wall, doesn't need forgiveness, send back immigrants and their American children to Mexico, ban Muslims, potty-mouthed degenerate. Certainly not one who emulates Christ.


This Pope should walk along our own walls in the UK that divide Catholic and Protestant communities - no doubt, in his crazy world, the Protestants are the non-Christians?


About 7% of what Trump says is true or mostly true.http://www.politifact.com/personalities/donald-trump/I'll take the principled, championing of the poor Pope over Trump any day of the week.


And so?What are you saying and are you prepared to apply whatever point you think you are going to make to trump?


The pope is a fool. Not only has his church a history or pedophilia, support for the Nazi's and the mafia, but the 'papa' thinks he can interfere in politics and get away with it. Well, he's given Trump a lift. How clever it that!


It heartens me that the only criticism you can cite about the Pope is in reference to past deeds of the Catholic Church - an institution he has been reforming! The Pope has worked tirelessly all his life to help the poor and eschews the rich trappings he could easily partake of. Trump has been making himself rich at the expense of other people, declaring 4 multi-million dollar bankruptcies, ruinkng jobs and pension. He is liar extraordinaire who also has a track record of misogynistic behaviour.You choose a money grabbing liar over a principled man. Who's the fool?


Ignorant remark. Trump is touting his Christianty to win votes. Don't you know the Buble is his favourite book? He said so. So Trump is a self avowed Christian who gets rich using other people's money. Thanks for inadvertently also proving he's a hypocrite!


"You can't make this stuff up!".But Trump did; and you fell for it...


The Vatican's gates are open to all. It's a dumb and false comparison - pretty much what I expect from Trump supporters.


This comment is awaiting moderation


It's The Pope, you illiterate, ignorant bag of excrement.


