What's all the fuss about. Trump can't get 50% of republican votes. He'll do even worse in a full election. 


I am divided. I like the 2 candidates who aren't owned by the Establishment, Trump and Sanders. I would love to watch a Trump presidency. But his anti-Moslem statements, and deporting illegal immigrants? No. I hope it's Trump vs Sanders and that Sanders wins. But if it's Trump vs Clinton I'd vote for Trump. (I am a liberal greenie but cannot stomach the foreign policy of Clinton, Rubio or Cruz. They are all dreadful hawks.)


... (any) moment soon.


Nothing but hot air. His bubble will bust with a loud bang any 


god bless donald trump ,,a plain speaking gentleman,you know exactly where you stand with him.. #wedontneedpoliticians !


If he can reverse the White Hice trend since Richard Nixon, Henry Kissinger and Sheikh Yamani, and get the US to stop working as a hired gun of Sunni Islam for Petro Dollars during a four year tenure, Trump would deserve a second term in office. If he could give Islam the quietus that Pax Britannica had but that Pax Americana resurrected, he would have served his purpose before God and Man.


It looks like Mr Trump is on his way to a landslide victory. He could be the UK's best friend when it comes to beating the Merkel Muslim Menace.A big thank you to all who sought to have him banned from the UK. It boosted his popularity on both sides of the Atlantic.


American democracy lol.Who's more terrifying as President? Trump or Clinton.Well we know what Clinton is about. Backing the likes of Monsanto, Wall Street and her fave - spreading freedom and democracy (in other words destabilising the middle east, perpetual war) not to mention her unwavering support of the madmen rulers of Israel. What the hell is Trump about?They're a long list of negatives on both sides. The charade here is that Clinton is in any way a better choice. 


What a load of baloney!


I could not have put it better myself, especially the bit of sneaky antisemitism


Sick comment.


