The thing is, the Pope is supporting the ideology of Islamic control and expansion. As soon as a Mosque is open for Jihadist training IN the Vatican, is the day the Catholic Church can be called a True Believer's paradise.


Bloody master move by Trump. Huge media covers free of charge. His name appears with Pope Francis. His PR men have done a great job. Donald, "president of the USA!" Wow!


Is God Christian or even his son Christ? Is there a wall or a bridge between Heaven and Hell? Christianity sounds like a good concept that has never been tried.


You should try it sometime then!


I'd be less concerned about the pope's lifestyle and & more concerned about my profile pic if i was you.


The pope bashes others for building walls, then he hides in his walled country at the Vatican.


The Vatican Wall has been there for 1000 years. Would you suggest that the Pope removes it or moves out to stay in a cheap hotel somewhere ? Is Trump going to deport 11 million people before he finishes his almost 2000 mile wall or afterwards do you think ?


The first Pope was Peter in 30 AD. Then Leo IV built the first walls in 847. Unless gods message has changed then the pope is a hypocrite.


Jesus said, "By their fruits you shall know them". I know we're all somewhat less than perfect, but it's hard to call someone a Christian when almost everything that comes out of their mouth contradicts the fundamental principles of Christian ethics. A lot of people, including many political leaders, have subscribed to Christianity in name, but failed to appreciate its radical approach to human relations.


There are times when the Catholic Church fails to excel at Christianity.


.... political leader... ? One ex-political leader comes into mind: Monsieur Tony Bliar!


The Vatican IS a Political Leader. On a GLOBAL scale, and they have a Socialist agenda. Failure to recognize political manipulation is a choice. So is denial and apathy. From an ex-Catholic for half a century now.


If you do not get the Catholic vote, you will end up with Presbyterian, Bigots and white supremacists


Trumpy backtracking


Comment of the day.Bravo!


