Putin denies everything, leveling that Syrian hospital included. He is a serial denier, and a serial killer.


Indie baby, even to mention Bellingcat is to ruin your already tenuous reputation for sophomore-style, semi-literate but enthusiastic reporting. Now, baby, you're just silly. Back to Remedial Spelling 101.


Putin rejected UNSC proposal last July for international inquiry. Nuff said!


We all look forward to the Bellingcat Group now doing IHAT's job for them and researching the numerous war crimes carried out by UK troops "in our name",Oh, of course, we are the 'goodies', so our war crimes are NEVER investigated professionally, let alone any action taken.Thank goodness the UK can be taken to the ICC because that is the only way victims of our atrocities are going to see justice done.


Hey you Marxist, your comment has no substance. Why?


Dutch investigating judge just made known that *no conclusive evidence is available*, not even if the plane was hit by an air-to-air missile. They also sighted the "evidence" the amateur propaganda blog "Bellingcat" had "researched" / faked, and found it all irrelevant.


Rusija no do This. Rusija good. Jhon Smith , Yew York.


Bellingcat is another basement garbage which gets its funding from Nato for trolling. The guy has a Turkish wife, and good connection with AKP government too. I'd give you more info but then the paper may be shut.


Why do you Marxists still defend Russia? What's your opinion of Russia bombing innocent civilians in Syria?


Bombing innocent civilians is a western and Israeli specialty numb nuts


And dropping dumb bombs on civilians does not kill them - asinine comment!


Nice one MI5 ;)


OK, so the CIA are paying by the word these days. A few more of these stories and you'll be rich.


Nice try. Still in dispute is a BUK or Israeli Python A2A fired from pursuing Su25 that did the deed. The Dutch cowards won't say. So we wait, even tho' we can guess. 


Making up facts does not make them facts - but then your Russian friends have a lot of practice!


Give the Indie a break. They're trying hard. What do you expect from a free student newspaper?


