what price another American Civil War ?


"All terrorists currently are Muslims..."; what a ridiculous, ill-informed comment.


In the last ten years, what proportion of terrorist victims were killed by Muslim terrorists, and what proportion by Christians, Hindus, Sikhs and every other religion all put together, Indy? Over 99%?Your denying what's staring you in the face is what's ridiculous and ill-informed.


You said "All terrorists...". Your statement was wrong.


Sensible good people supporting sensible moralistic policies


When did it become OK for the leftwing liberals to chose which laws they think should be adhere to and those that shouldnt . If we all followed that logic it would be anarchy .Gays could be attacked with impunity , Blacks could be refused jobs because of thier skin colour etc . One either has laws or one dosnt . These people entered the country illegally . They should be sent back. Its the law.


Refusing Blacks jobs and attacking gays is what Trump supporters want according to the research.


No it isn't. That is simple misrepresentation.


We should all be afraid - very afraid...


I'm glad you as a far left winger are afraid, Hayneman. The Left has been rubbing right wingers' noses in diversity and multiculturalism for far too long. Many people, not just right wingers like me, are sick to death of being afraid of saying the wrong thing in case the PC Twitter mob gets them, as happened to Prof. Tim Hunt. A backlash is building, not before time.


"afraid of saying the wrong thing"Aww diddums. You extreme right-wingers just don't like being criticised. You want to abuse everyone you don't like with impunity, but if anyone turns the tables, you cry like babies.


It wasn't just abuse in Tim Hunt's case, was it? It was destruction of his career and his accuser turned out to be lying.I only abuse people who start it. "Aw diddums". Up yours, Cat.


Why? He's got no chance of being elected as president. Most Democrats want him to win the Republican candidacy for that reason. All the bigots will vote for him but there's not enough of them to win the presidency.


