Why isn't she in prison?


Well the Swedes are the Jewel in the Mental Crown of the continent. They might as well support ISIS directly, they can't wait for them to be their neighbours.


She looks like she's into "Team Events". Hope she's had her health check.


I'm beginning to think that the Swedes were so called because they have the brains of a root vegetable.


The Guardian does not report on any crimes committed by people who belong to the "religion of pe@ce"; it is a mere proper ganda tool for the loony left, apologists for Isl@m and the pro-EU cabal.


This girl will have been treated far better than the little girls in Rotherham. As an 'ISIS bride', she got a home of her own and protection from abuse. Her life was probably pretty decent until her partner got killed.The girls in Rotherham were seen as total scum. Physically and psychologically tortured by Muslims who considered them worthless. They got no protection at all from South Yorkshire Police.An argument could be made that you're safer in Raqqa than in Rotherham, as young girl.


No "Magic Money Welfare Tree" in Raqqa, that's why they are coming to the UK


Sorry things didn't work out for her. Perhaps she should explore the many opportunities on the African continent...


Another educationally subnormal white girl convert with a rapefugee boyfriend now pleading ignorance. I bet she was well up for jihad until it wasn't all fun and frolics.


Just like the Holocaust. Can't love one lie and refuse the other.


Yes. This, to perhaps abuse the terms, is all the product of the schizophrenia or even bi-polarity of certain European nations that historically go from one political extreme to the other. I dont know about Sveden apart their cooperation with Germany at the time, but the Nazi's rise to power was quite alongside the rise of their competition, the Communists in 30's Germany, and in opposition to the liberality of the Wiemar republic. Some nations are it seems in some ways (not all) unbalanced and are pushing Europe once again towards the tipping point.


H.H.L.EYou are absolutely right. It is pity that After Adolf, Germany has got another madman who believes she is the saviour of Europe.


"People are afraid of talking freely about Islam, refugees and multiculturalism...Swedish men...do not dare to say a word"Oh get a grip, you wet drip. No one is arrested or harmed for discussing those things. The worst that could happen is someone publicly criticises your opinion. It's *you* that sounds emasculated. You extreme right-wingers get more spineless by the day - hysterically ranting about lefties like they're some kind of bogeyman that's going to attack you in your beds at night.


Left Wing filing cabinets and Right Wing filing cabinets......both remind me of high rise flats. There are people trying live their live's in there.


Actually, it's what happened in this country. For years, anyone who criticised immigrants in any way were immediately and loudly proclaimed to be racist.


Another product of a creepy leftist society with poor family values. I am waiting for the next nonsense article that islam is a religion of peace while isis slaughter thousands.


