"I can act as presidential as any other US candidate"........I bet Groucho Marx could have said the same..............


Prashant - do ever feel you may be TAKEN for an EIGHTEENTH century journalist WITH your occasional, not particularly helpful, PUNCTUATION?


Trump really is becoming unhinged - the same as Lincoln, FDR, Eisenhower or Kennedy? The world should be very afraid...


Well said - just like the Tories and Ukippers...


He only gets racist votes


He's an oaf and a bully. Unable to deal with contrary opinions, he surrounds himself with yes people & a bevy of lawyers. How many people were damaged by his multiple bankruptcies?If he wasn't contesting against the vilest creatures that humanity has to offer, he would be laughed off the stage.


"Unable to deal with contrary opinions"When you say this, are you describing Trump? because to me it sounds like you're describing leftists.And nobody was hurt by his bankruptcies, do you not think that lenders take the risk of bankruptcy into account and adjust for it?


But, at least Trump has some experience of running a large organisation. He also has experience of negotiating deals. Oh, and Trump was Ivy League.Obama's 'qualification' seemed to be that he had been a 'community organiser'.


...is going bankupt four times a sign of good business acumen?...


Firstly, a business bankruptcy is not the same as personal bankruptcy.Secondly, declaring bankruptcy is a legitimate business tactic and he saved countless jobs in his casinos by doing..And finally, 4 relative failures out of his hundreds of business ventures is a pretty good track record dont you think?


I think his bank balance might suggest that it is.But, you can make your own mind up and vote for some bought-and-paid-for liar who'll just do his handlers' bidding, I suppose.Don't moan when your job and livelihood disappear over the Mexican border, however.


Yeah, he turned $8 billion into $2 billion


Multi billionaire. Some clown. How much are you worth? Not much I'd bet.


Some businessman? He started with a modest $1 million dollar loan from his father and has been bankrupt four times, despite investing in guaranteed money-makers like casinos and hotels...


So he's turned a million into a billion. Some loser.


His German immigrant father left him $8 billion, he's spunked 6 of those so far.


To say he's 'virtually unchallenged' is duplicitous indeed. Indeed, his biggest enemies are the GOP itself who are still using every trick in the book to prevent his nomination.In reality, he is peddling a powerful but simple message. The politicians are corrupt liars doing the bidding of their backers. It is an undeniable truth. Since he is entirely self-funding, he can also state, without fear of contradiction, that he is beholden to nobody.No wonder the establishment can't stand him. Just think how much they stand to lose.His message is so powerful, it will transcend old Party lines. Of course he'll pick up bucket loads of Democrat voters. He'll pick up a fair percentage of the African American vote. He talks of policies to benefit all Americans, not just the narrow interests.Again, it is any wonder the establishment hates him?


Are you really equating somebody sending in a cheque for $100 with a payment from one of the Wall Street syndicates for services to be rendered?I guess democracy has never found a way around the problem of one idiot, one vote.


Rather Trump than the frankly deranged Cruz who hears voices in his head.


You're clearly not black, Hispanic, Muslim or poor...


The man is a racist, what is wrong with you ?


