Headline::::
Ask Alanis Morissette: should I protect my son from my husband?




DateTime::::2016-03-04T16:00:39+0000



<p><strong>I</strong> <strong>am 40, my husband is 20 years older, and we have a four-year-old son. Our parenting methods are very different: my husband reprehends our son and puts him down, and I have to protect him. I want my son to love his dad instead of fearing him or feeling resentful, and to grow up confident and emotionally strong. What can I do?</strong><br/>It sounds as if your disparate styles of parenting are threatening your bond with your husband. While the advice would usually be to make sure both parents are united in their parenting approach (and certainly this is the ideal), there are times when it might be best to temporarily prioritise your son’s wellbeing while working to establish a united front with your husband.</p>

<p>Too often people reprimand their child and send the message that the child’s natural impulses are innately “bad”, rather than focusing on the behaviour not working in a given context. If you haven’t already, this would be an important discussion to have with your husband, perhaps with a therapist if it can’t be done alone. Many of my husband’s and my couples therapy sessions focus on how we are as parents. Not surprisingly, how we parent our children often mirrors how we interact with our spouse and the world around.</p>

<p>If this is not possible, you would need to find a way to set a boundary with your husband’s approach, while letting your son know that it is his behaviour that is being addressed and not his core self. As an example: if I see my husband approaching our son in a way that doesn’t resonate with my values, I say: “What behaviour is not working?” This works more effectively because my husband and I have discussed it when not around my son. If your bond with your husband is strong, he won’t be confused about why you might stand up for your son. It is always important to revisit this disconnection later, however, when your son is not there, and to let your husband know how important it is to you that you are both on the same page when it comes to setting limits for your son.</p>

<p> <span>Related: </span><a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/19/ask-alanis-my-mother-in-law-putting-childrens-health-risk">Ask Alanis: My mother-in-law is putting my children’s health at risk. What should I do?</a> </p>

<p>Two books you could read and discuss together are <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://bookshop.theguardian.com/no-drama-discipline.html">No-Drama Discipline</a> by Daniel J Siegel and Tina Payne Bryson, and <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://bookshop.theguardian.com/parenting-without-power-struggles.html">Parenting Without Power Struggles</a> by Susan Stiffelman. Hopefully these will help you to form a more united and empathic front.</p>

<p><span class="bullet">•</span> Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://alanis.com/?utm_source=Guardian&amp;utm_medium=Campaign&amp;utm_campaign=The%20Guardian%20Website%20Link">alanis.com</a>. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morissette at <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com">ask.alanis@theguardian.com.</a></p>




Author::::pecan
DateTime::::2016-03-07T13:56:07Z
Recommend a really good parenting book



Author::::pecan
DateTime::::2016-03-07T13:36:53Z
Then the same books will help her too.



Author::::pecan
DateTime::::2016-03-07T13:36:00Z
Either way the books alanis suggests will help because they explain how to teach childern better behaviour without being too strict or too soft.



Author::::pecan
DateTime::::2016-03-07T13:29:19Z
So basically the mother should start acting codependent? The answer is not for the mother to take responsibility for the father's parenting but that the father should take responsibility.



Author::::sharpydufc
DateTime::::2016-03-07T10:08:30Z
it is best the family home is paid off before any child is born



Author::::NietzscheanChe
DateTime::::2016-03-07T09:44:55Z
Kids with overbearing fathers always grow up to be weirdos.



Author::::Angus66
DateTime::::2016-03-06T21:40:08Z
I was determined not to make the same mistakes my young father at age 20 made , a father who clearly resented being shackled with a child. His wife and children came a sorry last , the pub , clubs and gambling came first.The resulting neglect , poverty and abuse was awful. Needless to say he lost the family home. Some men are best waiting until they are a bit older and mature enough for the important responsibility of raising children , especially if extended family support is either absent or unreliable.



Author::::nuliajuk
DateTime::::2016-03-06T16:03:21Z
Parents can do lasting damage to their children. You seem to think that those children have a duty to grow up normal and psychologically healthy no matter how badly they're treated.



Author::::nuliajuk
DateTime::::2016-03-06T16:01:24Z
No, I don't think so. The 60s were only permissive for people in the fringe counterculture groups. I'm 3 years younger than the husband in this letter and the home I grew up in certainly wasn't a permissive one.That sort of parenting didn't become the norm until the mid 70s.



Author::::ilweran
DateTime::::2016-03-06T14:31:11Z
My little boy, not quite three, asks to wear certain things and I go with it if it's appropriate, what benefit is it to any of us to cause a fuss because I was going to dress him in the monkey t-shirt and he wants the Thomas one? 



Author::::Tonda99
DateTime::::2016-03-06T13:33:47Z
Is having a child with a 56 year old man any more or less self centred or not self centred at all?



Author::::BaddHamster
DateTime::::2016-03-06T11:38:13Z
Freud was a crazy coke head!



Author::::EstorilBlue
DateTime::::2016-03-06T08:58:44Z
I was the stricter parent of our two sons, but rarely felt the need to be too overt about it. My key aim was to try to allow them to make their own decisions, and crucially, in my view, to take responsibility for those decisions whether they proved good, bad or indifferent. 



Author::::Persianwar
DateTime::::2016-03-06T01:21:08Z
Utter modern parent rubbish. A child who is not reprimanded learns that they can do what they wish and by their teems will be running the household....badly.



Author::::Persianwar
DateTime::::2016-03-06T01:19:50Z
"Now now Tarquin, please don't electrocute the goldfish."



Author::::lizidrip
DateTime::::2016-03-06T00:30:13Z
Read properly, I did



Author::::Letschat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T19:10:44Z
Yes, sometimes estrangements or near estrangements are necessary unfortunately. Our family has not come through intact. My sibling with the PTSD is back in touch with my mother and was back in touch with Dad too before the end but when your trigger for your illness is your family, well, it's not pretty is it. I love my sibling whom I don't see. But it's very complicated and best for everyone as it is. We can speak civilly and I know she sometimes misses me too. But it needs to be what it is. And yes, I do hold my parents accountable for what happened to her. It was inexcusable.I think you said earlier that you despise women who are too weak to make changes for the sake of their children. I'd be tempted to add lazy. You'd despise my Mum I think. I don't, although at times I've struggled with her lack of action in the face of clear and present danger to her children's mental health - AFTER one child had already been hospitalised and despite her having the capacity to leave and earn a living. My Mum also did a lot right and there's much about her parenting I was happy to emulate. But she made some very very serious mistakes. I believe she has secrets from her past / childhood that I don't understand too so one has to consider we don't know everything behind someone's choices and actions or lack of action. I believe she tried. I believe both my parents were in way over their heads and simply not equipped to handle the situation they found themselves in. I forgave them both and moved on and focussed on being the best parent I possibly could with the benefit of what my life had shown me. I knew some of the things NOT to do! It's a start. Eventually once married and with a family of my own I had to simply ban my parents talking to me about the other parent. End of story. Refuse to buy into things like "Is your mother going to be there." "If you want to stay away and exclude yourself from the grandkid's birthday then fine. That's your choice, but I WILL NOT be made to choose between my parents, You will always both be invited so get over it." Yep, I actually would say it and he was big enough to actually do it and I respected his doing so because he certainly had plenty of reason to not enjoy watching her swan around with the family highlighting his somewhat less easy relationships. or "He wants this or won't give me that in the settlement", or "He said this as a condition of getting back together". Would get. "I don't want to know, leave me out of it." In a tone that brooked no opposition. Their separation went on with talk of reconciliation and settlements and negotiations for a decade or more and all the time, mainly Mum, trying to recruit the kids to her side but pretending to be the magnanimous one. She had no problem with Dad being at functions.. yeah well she wouldn't would she, she was the clear winner in the battle for hearts and minds. You have to be strong and set the rules and ultimately be prepared to get the saw out and cut off the branch if that's what it comes to. I had one other lucky break too. While vilifying my Dad people always would comment that I was like him and that I was his favourite. Although I regard both these things as emotional abuse, not just to me but to my siblings, in the particular circumstances it was something that helped save me in the end. Was I his favourite? I don't believe so, Dad loved all his children very much, and I had to work through that, not that it took much once I had kids... how could any parent really have a favourite, but it gave him a chink in the wall to climb through to reach me, and for that I am grateful. So well done you too. I wish you all good things and continued courage and happiness with your family.



Author::::TheWhatWhatofWhat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T19:01:53Z
Yes, about the only thing worse than parents trying to pretend there is a united front when the child can see there are differences is for the parents to start condemning each other .



Author::::SallyruthG
DateTime::::2016-03-05T18:53:00Z
Totally agree. Why do parents ask their children if they want to go to bed/eat their dinner/get off the train etc when it is obvious the answer is going to be no? It gives children the entirely wrong idea that everything is negotiable. It isn't



Author::::Letschat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T18:06:10Z
Oh I completely agree about parents looking to themselves and their own behaviour in response to their children's behaviour. Kids are little mirrors. If you have a behaviour problem they'll reflect it for you. In some situations it's about learning a new way to talk to the kid, or steeling yourself to deliver a promised consequence when really all your heart is saying is give this adored child everything it wants, in some it's just about stop giving them an horrendous role model to follow in the first place. The whole, do as I say not as I do thing. Got to learn not to do that one. It's HARD to try to be who you want your child to be. Parenthood is a wonderful opportunity for personal growth and if you approach it in any other way it's going to be even harder than it can be and everyone will feel it.



Author::::Letschat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T17:56:05Z
I'm glad we clarified that because it really sounded like you were saying something else. I agree it would be virtually impossible to find two human beings who parent in precisely the same way.



Author::::Carol Bolland
DateTime::::2016-03-05T17:51:05Z
My daughter at 3 would decide what she wanted to wear. I used to put her clothes out. She put them away and got out what she wanted to wear! Not a big deal.



Author::::TheWhatWhatofWhat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T15:48:47Z
No, the whole point is to teach the child that both parents are sincere and love him/her and that their sincerity and love merits respect.



Author::::CatMafia
DateTime::::2016-03-05T14:37:41Z
Does your husband get a yearly physical and blood work? If not, both you and he should do so to protect your health, especially since you have a young child. My medical insurance carrier (and HMO) requires it every year and they pay in full for all the testing.



Author::::dianab
DateTime::::2016-03-05T14:34:43Z
think that both are mentioned separately means both are happening. Reprehending can be different from setting boundaries and putting down is never necessary



Author::::Asterisknow
DateTime::::2016-03-05T14:07:36Z
I understand all your points. Well done you!



Author::::Asterisknow
DateTime::::2016-03-05T13:47:26Z
Exactly! Why would a 3 y.o. child would have to decide which dress to wear? Parenting styles have changed so much in the past 30 years or so, but especially with the onset on the internet. Children haven't changed, parents have.



Author::::THKMTL
DateTime::::2016-03-05T12:52:32Z
I'm not surprized ! The goal is to provide education and good example sufficiently to allow SELF-discipline . Young take no REAL notice of those who are blind themselves. What is forgotten is that the young are free or freer from a whole set of preconceptions which make adults blind to the 'atmosphere ' they are creating t being focused only on narrow' things' . THe young pepole sensitive to the underlying atmosphere being created , which adults have been taught to pretend doesn't exist .When you attempt to allow self- discipline , you create light , when you attempt to impose your disci[pline on others , you create darkness.The first can never be wrong the second can never be right.You are lost : ergo young people are the least likely to be convinced otherwise.



Author::::neko99
DateTime::::2016-03-05T12:41:22Z
Well, I don't agree. I've known a couple of people who had older Dads and they had to be much calmer and quieter at home.



Author::::THKMTL
DateTime::::2016-03-05T12:14:49Z
There is a whole wonderful world out there , which you are missing . In my humble opinion you could have more imagination and not take things for granted , things are not as they may seem , just because you have been conditioned or programmed to look at things from a particular perspective .



Author::::THKMTL
DateTime::::2016-03-05T11:57:49Z
Sorry , I have wifi problems , thing in the sticks , I didn't even post the above , I was just trying to battle with the wifi .Obviously it is very difficult to convey complicated matters in this medium , without writing a book !But I will try to explain some things in their essence , I am hoping to provide a few principles for further thought , rather than to be taken 'as read'.The first problems arise today , from the practice of putting babies in a remote quiet room' to sleep '.Put yourself in the place of the baby, silent rooms are NOT natural , add on listening to hushed creepings about , lowered tones and whisperings , and you have created :1. boredom 2. aisolation 3. sinister sectretive goings on . 4. an atmosphere of dishonesty.Thus the baby cries / more like screams its head off from insecurity and fright.The parent , who is also programmed to believe that , not only does 'sleep' for babies = sleep for adults , but crying for babies = crying for adults ,ie distress /pain , drops everything , runs to the baby , often making shushuing , and other distress and fear reinforcing behaviour .Before one week , the baby has learnt that a) sleeping is a scary experience b) there are terrifyingly sinister goings on in the world . c)If h screams there is panic , followed by instant attention. REsult : we have set up a whole world of misconconceptions , miscommunications and very bad habits indeed for probably life and the next generation !I will contrast this senario with the correct one .Baby 'sleeps ' in the midst of normality without compromise . He is entertained , and importantly receiving a huge amount of information and savvy about the world and relationships , from just hearing , lisstening .On waking the baby listens contentedly , remembers to be hungry and' cries' for attention , if someone hasn't noticed he has awoken and picked him up already. Ther is no shudhing or panicking when the baby is expressing himself / excercising his lungs .Result by contrast : Relaxed attitude to sleeping or waking ; natural relations , a preparing equipping of the baby for the next stage of his moving around freely as an integral part of goings on .I hope that this conveys some of what I mean by allowing to do the right thing.As children get older , outside influences can cause confusion for the child . The parent often falsely blames themselves for the behaviour , and panics ( as before )A parent who cannot devise an imaginative , lively , and funny solution for the misunderstanding , does not exist , if they only looked to themselves and their greater experience , instead of expecrting the CHILD to correct the situation.I am of course speakling of the ideal and it isn't easy for parents under everyday huge strain to have the energy to remember not to panic . But the only important thing is to apologise to the child for your misbehaviour , and get on with happy living .



Author::::Letschat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T11:14:59Z
THKMTL, I don't dispute your experience, but I think it depends enormously on the temperament of the child. Some kids are easier to manage than others. All children need to be managed or they wouldn't need parents. Adopting your approach is great up to a point but it also comes with a risk. In going too far to the other extreme, it is really really easy to slip into emotional manipulation rather than what is perceived as "discipline" and that can screw a kid up in the head just as bad if you're not careful. Especially if parents make God the bogeyman. That's spiritual abuse.



Author::::Fallowfield
DateTime::::2016-03-05T11:06:15Z
Many a teacher will tell you that when they eventually meet the parents, the behaviour of the child in school becomes much easier to understand.



Author::::THKMTL
DateTime::::2016-03-05T10:52:35Z
My parents were extremely negligent and 'victotian' , but I also don't have any particular 'gift' , I made some mistakes with my own children from anxiety as described above , that is how I know how it is ! I have always chatted to about thebeginning , so there was an aymosphere of 'being interested in ' everything , and exploring together . instead of , the authority /teaching attitude . There was never a need for crying, tantrums , or tellings off .Allowing children to do the right thing , rather than disciplining them leads to self-disciplined children . When allowed to be all children are enormously, helpful , wise ,



Author::::makdownunder
DateTime::::2016-03-05T10:41:57Z
sounds like to resent them both.



Author::::Letschat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T10:32:21Z
I think there are elements I agree with in both your comments here. Our children are not us. We can share our experience. We can set the boundaries and ultimately in the case of a minor when there is a difference of opinion the minor needs to understand that they just have to suck it up and wait until they are in a position to head out and control their own life completely. Get their education and a job and run their own life. But in my opinion, you cannot wait to start handing over responsibility to when they turn 18. Children need to own their own consequences. Protect them from consequences and you protect them from learning and create the conditions for unbridled rebellion which ultimately endangers our objective as parents. The art is in making sure that the challenges they face are within their ability to deal with. Ultimately I think it is safer erring on the side of less discipline than too much. But too little discipline is damaging too and confusing for the child. As for "The great thing about children, is that as long as you are being simply yourself , and absolutely never behaving in a false or contrived way , they will always feel at ease with you and respect what you say. "I think that would be nice but it is just so completely incorrect I don't know where to start. Perhaps THKMTL you had wonderful parents,whose example you just innately follow, perhaps you have great emotional intelligence and have everything going for you. You've got a better chance than many people in that case but even then, depending on the personality of the kid and yours, the chances of this are really very very slim. Parenting is hard. Emotionally challenging and exhausting simply because this hippy lovey land thing is just not how it happens for most people. Though I think you are right that the trick is to keep your eyes focussed clearly on the the simple things in life that matter most. That comes at a cost and it's easier in some societies or socio economic groups than others.



Author::::ameliaposte
DateTime::::2016-03-05T10:20:15Z
It's because usually these letters include examples of the negative behaviour (be it controlling/cheating/violating privacy etc). Without any examples it is hard to know if there is a genuine problem or if she is just witnessing a more old-school authoritarian/strict parenting style.



Author::::ameliaposte
DateTime::::2016-03-05T10:18:54Z
It definitely can but it would have been good to have some examples of the behaviour she considers to be putting the child down.



Author::::Letschat
DateTime::::2016-03-05T09:58:02Z
Or just as likely it has nothing to do with it and you've just put quite unhelpful ideas in the woman's head which would likely make the situation worse.



Author::::Ignite01
DateTime::::2016-03-05T09:05:13Z
I'm not sure how keen I'd be on having a four year old around at 60, but the fact is that he did go ahead and do just that, so he has to live with it. At the moment it looks as though what's going to happen is that the boy will have two behaviours - with Mum and with Dad - and be thoroughly confused.



Author::::GodfreyRich
DateTime::::2016-03-05T08:55:40Z
Having a kid at 56 is a bit self centered



Author::::FattMatt
DateTime::::2016-03-05T08:53:32Z
It's whether both parents are making sure that the child understands there are consequences to it's actions. At four years old that is still a little young, though repeated indiscipline needs to be resolved or you could be producing a narcissist.



Author::::GodfreyRich
DateTime::::2016-03-05T08:44:48Z
A lot of us that cut across the generations are aware that people of 60-70 came of age in an environment where it was normal to have a more critical / negative / confrontational approach.



Author::::DekeThornton
DateTime::::2016-03-05T08:25:16Z
@Letschat:



Author::::VerneWells
DateTime::::2016-03-05T08:21:44Z
You can't possibly know that and we can only decide on the basis of the information given. Nice of you not to be all judgey though.



Author::::Bambis
DateTime::::2016-03-05T08:17:10Z
Wives/women/mums can get overloaded and start snapping at their children too... and yes, need a break. How about a cup of tea in bed tomorrow, with gifts of cards and flowers?



Author::::S Shah
DateTime::::2016-03-05T07:57:28Z
When i was growing up, dads were to disciple and moms to protect and threat. "Wait till i tell your dad / wait till your dad comes home" kids were just fine. Stop over reacting. I assume you over react and protect more then required and make situtation worse. Also please dont use the child as an excuse for your issues with dad. An occqsion "i hate dad" is fine... as long as mom says "but dad really loves you"



Author::::hjb243
DateTime::::2016-03-05T07:29:06Z
The letter doesn't say much but it does say that the father puts the son down. I think we should take that to be true - although a lot of commenters seem to doubt it. She also talks about the boy being fearful.



Author::::TheGrange
DateTime::::2016-03-05T07:23:56Z
I don't even see that as being about discipline. I think it's kinder to do what you do. It can put pressure on a small child, unnecessarily asking them to make decisions.



