Without Donald Trump to kick them around anymore, the other leading Republican candidates for president put together a substantive debate on Thursday night in Iowa. They tangled over immigration, vied to denounce Hillary Clinton, and promised to strike ISIS hard. But it may not have been enough for any of the candidates to change their fate, with the Iowa caucus just days away.With Trump on the other side of Des Moines, at a fundraiser for veterans, the debate provided a glimpse at the race that might have been. It was possible, again, to understand why a calmer, more confident Jeb Bush had once seemed like the frontrunner, as he fielded tough questions without pandering to the crowd. Marco Rubio delivered a typically polished performance, only this time, it wasn’t overshadowed by Trump’s antics. Rand Paul stressed the issues, from civil liberties to criminal-justice reform to a more restrained foreign-policy, that set him apart from the field and were supposed to make him a contender. John Kasich stressed his record, and his optimism.Chris Christie, meanwhile, suddenly found himself the most belligerent candidate on the stage, a tonal challenge he labored to master. And without Trump to serve as a foil, Ted Cruz struggled to find targets appropriately scaled for his barbs and attacks. Only Ben Carson’s performance seemed unaltered, his manner still somnolent, and his foreign-policy questions still fumbled.Fox News had a surprise for the candidates—pre-packaged flip-flop reels showing their reversals on several key issues. Megyn Kelly showed Rubio a compilation of his promises never to consider amnesty, and asked him to square it with his support in the Senate’s Gang of Eight for a path to citizenship.Rubio first denied it, but when Kelly refused to back down, he then pivoted to attack his one-time mentor Jeb Bush. “You changed your position on immigration because you used to support a path to citizenship,” Rubio said.“Yeah. So did you, Marco,” Bush responded.Next, it was Ted Cruz’s turn. Megyn Kelly played another flip-flop reel, this one showing Cruz’s own apparent evolution on the question of amnesty. Cruz denied reversing himself. The problem with Cruz, charged Rand Paul, is that “everybody he knows is not as perfect as him,” accusing him of attacking others for holding the same positions on immigration he’d taken himself. And then Marco Rubio, sensing an opportunity, piled on: “Now you want to out-trump Trump on immigration. But you can't—we're not going to beat Hillary Clinton with someone who's willing to say or do anything to win an election.”By the end of the exchange, none of the participants seemed well-positioned to siphon off the anti-immigration anger that has helped fuel Donald Trump’s rise. They also did little to address pervasive economic anxieties, to tap the resentment of the political establishment, or to otherwise address the forces that have propelled him to a commanding national lead. The moderators did little to help, peppering the candidates with questions on topics from Puerto Rican statehood to data encryption.It might have been interesting to watch Trump’s grimaces and facial contortions as his own flip-flop reel played. But he avoided awkward questions on his own, far-longer list of substantive reversals. Standing alone on stage at his veterans’ event across town, though, Trump appeared equally diminished by the absence of his rivals. He brought Rick Santorum and Mike Huckabee up to join him, before yielding the podium to veterans for half an hour. The other cable-news networks cut away from their live coverage, and the rally wound down to its anti-climactic end while the debate remained in full swing.Most of the candidates came into the night needing something dramatic to change, and it seems unlikely that any of them found it. Ted Cruz enjoys the greatest support among committed caucus-goers, and gave them more of what they’ve found attractive to this point. Trump generated two days of round-the-clock coverage leading up to the debate, which may prove more valuable to him than the missed opportunity to make his case one more time. Whether his even-larger number of supporters bothers to come out to caucus remains an open question.There will be no more debates before the caucuses commence on Monday night. For a year, the campaign has been measured in polls and focus groups, dollars raised and funds expended, and media appearances and endorsements. It’s possible to squint hard enough at that assemblage of indicators, and see hopeful signs for almost every candidate, just as it was possible to watch the debate and find some aspect of each candidate’s performance to applaud. In a few days, success will instead be tallied in votes and delegates, and the results will be unambiguous.—Yoni AppelbaumRepublican candidates on the stage tonight had their sights set on Ted Cruz. That was with good reason since Cruz is leading the rest of the field in Iowa, apart from Trump who of course was absent at the debate. Cruz excels in the debate format, but he looked uncomfortable at times as he fended of attack, including charges that he can't be trusted on illegal immigration. That criticism was bolstered by intense questioning from moderator Megyn Kelly.  Cruz was also forced to double down on previous opposition to long-term continuation of the Renewable Fuel Standard, a popular Iowa policy. It will be interesting to see what Iowa voters make of it all when they head to the caucuses next week.The breakout performance in the first-round debate was delivered by former Virginia Governor Jim Gilmore, who won just by showing up. The narrowing field let him garner 1 percent support for the very first time, and make it on stage. Interest in Gilmore spiked, as he briefly became the candidate most queried on Google. Earlier this afternoon, he spoke with Clare Foran about his Quixotic run for the presidency. A sample of what he had to say:It’s time for somebody to bell the cat and tell the truth, which is that a socialist approach has never worked in history, and it will never work in the future. It didn’t work in Russia. It won’t work in America.The Republican candidates have long dreamed of the moment when Donald Trump will finally depart the stage. Tonight, that dream comes true—only it’s turned into a nightmare.After escalating his ongoing feud with Fox, Trump declared he wouldn’t participate in the network’s Thursday night debate. Trump’s precipitous withdrawal leaves Ted Cruz at the center of the stage, but he’ll be unable to draw direct contrasts with the man who has surged past him in the Iowa polls. Cruz will be flanked by six other candidates, all of whom had planned to use the debate in Des Moines to make their closing pitch to Iowa voters before Monday’s caucuses.But now, many of those voters may change the channel, to catch the latest installment of The Donald Trump Show. He’s counter-programmed his own event across town, purportedly a fundraiser for veterans. Rick Santorum and Mike Huckabee, who are participating in the undercard debate along with Carly Fiorina and Jim Gilmore, will scoot three miles across Des Moines to join him, and to try to edge into his spotlight. The other candidates lack the luxury of following the cameras over to Trump—having qualified for the main event, they suddenly risk being relegated to a sideshow.You, dear reader, don’t have to face the same Morton’s Fork. We’ll be live-blogging both the debate and the Trump event right here.Iowa voters who choose to watch the debate tonight will find a familiar cast of characters. Cruz has captured the anti-establishment mood of the moment better than any of his rivals, as my colleague Molly Ball explains. Ben Carson, whose star has dimmed, still enjoys support among Christian conservatives in the Hawkeye State. Marco Rubio’s waiting for his moment, perpetually imminent yet never quite here, and Jeb Bush is hoping his hasn’t passed for good. John Kasich and Chris Christie are looking past Iowa to New Hampshire, where the role of truth-telling, tough-minded blue-state governor has more appeal. And Rand Paul makes it back to prime time after being excluded from the last debate, in time to reach out to the Iowans who rallied to his father’s libertarian standard in 2012.Cruz, robbed of the chance to square off with Trump, is likely to become a target himself. His opposition to ethanol subsidies is unpopular in Iowa and has led Governor Terry Branstad to denounce him. Kasich, Rubio, and Bush, who are locked in a four-way tie for second with Cruz in New Hampshire, may take the chance to draw contrasts with Cruz on issues from immigration to tax reform. Paul has broad policy differences with the rest of the field, particularly with respect to civil liberties and foreign policy, and now that he’s back on stage will lose little time in pointing that out. Carson’s fortunes, for better and for worse, have been wholly divorced from his performances in debates, where he often disappears. And there’s at least a slight chance that Christie will remind voters he was a prosecutor on 9/11.You can follow every twist and turn of the race with our 2016 Distilled election dashboard, find out more about the candidates by using our 2016 Cheat Sheet, and see how viewers are responding to the candidates with our real-time emoji tracker. And follow along with us, as we live-blog all the action in Des Moines.—Yoni Appelbaum

