Last week, I asked Donald Trump supporters why they believe that the billionaire real-estate developer will treat them any better than the career politicians they mistrust.A Letter to Donald Trump Supporters With One Big QuestionThe dozens of replies that I received from across the United States make up the largest collection I’ve encountered of Trump supporters setting forth their thinking in their own words. And having read through this non-representative sample, I understand the candidate’s rise better than I did before. Broadly speaking, the men and women who wrote fall into two categories: Those who earnestly believe that Trump is the best choice to lead America and those who are motivated by giddyness at the chaotic spectacle of his success. Of course, anyone polling at the top of a major party is going to have supporters with all sorts of backgrounds and world views, and while the correspondence below includes several recurring themes, many of the rationales are singular.The table of contents has internal links for those who want to jump to a given entry, but don’t rely too heavily on the titles and short excerpts that I’ve chosen: Many of the responses contained so many rationales that summing them up proved impossible. Below the table of contents you may find all the letters, presented in their full text, in no particular order.​* * *A Liberal Who Wants America to Win––“I feel that Trump is our only hope in this next election. This is coming from someone who voted for Obama in the last election!”​* * *I have been a liberal practically all of my life (29 years). I am an atheist, and my first ever Presidential vote was cast for John Kerry. I more or less despised George Bush, and even though I leaned toward Hillary in 2008, I voted for Obama in 2012. I support gay marriage, legalization of marijuana, and many other liberal positions.I do, however, believe that our country is in a terrible position and on a terrible track. Trump strikes many of my nerves, but one of the most accurate and dangerously true statements he has made is that "America doesn't win anymore." I agree. The world is rising while America falls. America and its leaders seem resigned to this fact. Rather than stiffening their spine and fighting to make America a prosperous nation for all, they simply talk, go through the motions, throw out a few "red meat" issues to keep their respective bases satisfied, and continue to concede American jobs and economic strength to the rest of the world.To friends and family, I have long railed against the fact that America uses Presidential rejects and other back-bench political cronies as their chief negotiators. John Kerry (yes, the man I voted for) was out-negotiated time and time again by his Russian counterpart. And now, it appears that the same thing has happened once again with the Iran negotiators. This all ties back to the same fundamental thread: politicians have failed this country, leading to one loss after another.I do not believe that I am a racist, sexist, homophobic, or any other negative label that has been affixed to Trump supports. Rather, I feel that political correctness has run amok in this country, and we now live in a society where every blogger and Twitter user is searching for the slightest offense so they can try to ruin another human (famous, or not). The average person is afraid of expressing any controversial opinion in a public forum for fear of being "exposed," made viral, and ruined, personally and/or professionally. It is heartening to see someone as confident and impervious to criticism as Trump standing up to this ever-present mob…and winning! People tend to support the underdog. Most media outlets have attacked Trump with so much vitriol that they have turned him into a sympathetic figure.Yes, I really do feel that Donald Trump has the interests of America at heart. He has already made his money and lived a life of glamour and fame, and another few billion dollars won't have any real impact on his quality of life. Rather, I genuinely believe that Trump feels the need to fight for the country he loves. There once was a time when people could actually feel proud to be Americans, and Trump comes from a generation that experienced that feeling. Now, many are embarrassed to be associated with this country. Jobs are being outsourced with reckless abandon and this country is literally being hollowed out. Economic statistics do no justice to this reality, and the average American knows this to be true.Trump supporters feel that a confident, strong-willed leader is needed to right the ship and to fight back against the perpetual decline this country has experienced for the last two-plus decades. And to be honest, I feel that Trump is our only hope in this next election. This is coming from someone who voted for Obama in the last election! Anyway, that's my story and the main reasons why I support Trump. I didn't plan out this response for days or try to make this all-inclusive, but this should give you a fair idea of why I, a liberal, support Donald Trump for president.(Jump to table of contents)I would like to offer my reasoning for supporting Trump. I know he would do a pretty terrible job at this point, but I really am at the point of letting the whole thing burn down and explode. Trump would help us get there faster and more efficiently. Like the joker from The Dark Knight, I just want to see the world burn. I guess I am an anarchist in that respect. Once it's all burnt down maybe we can have that constitutional convention we really need to fix things and get this country back on track if it still exists. Happy Friday. If you do decide to publish please include the email signature below.Sent from NSA Monitored Device(Jump to table of contents)I will vote for Donald Trump (and to a lesser extent Bernie Sanders) because he represents hope. The two party system has a stranglehold on the voting public. Our choices are limited to way left or way right. There is no party that represents me: a socially responsible, economic conservative. A vote for Trump is the first step in breaking up the two-party system. Two parties to represent 300 million people? Please ... And how much damage can he really do? We still have 2 more branches of government to protect us. The risk is small––and the potential for political change is great. Do I want to make conception the beginning of life? No! Do I want another garbage pile of a bloated bill like the ACA? No! (By the way where is the affordable part of the ACA?) A vote for Trump is my vote against both parties. A Trump win is the Hope & Change that Obama promised but couldn't deliver.(Jump to table of contents)Background: CPA, University of WI. Auditor of federal programs, business owner, father, husband, former vice-chair of county Republicans. CFO and consultant to several mid-sized companies. Christian. I do not expect anyone to vote like I would on every issue. I do not expect that abortion will end, I do not expect that policy will favor me. No one will end all wars. I live in the real world. We conservatives have received nothing but promises from the Republican Party for 35 years. I don't know how many times I have been asked to work hard for a moderate conservative with the promise that "once we get in we will listen to your side.” Never happens. Of course, I did not have an extra 100K to donate to them either.I have no expectations of Trump except that he will attempt to make America great again. I expect that he will take his drive for perfection on his properties and actually figure out how to make America better. Will he do it my way? No. Will he hold all my values? No. Will I like all his methods or results? No. He will expect greatness from us, he will tell us how to get to great, he will inspire people to be better than they are and have hope that their efforts will not be thwarted by bigger government.He will not put up with the BS of the world dictators, not because he threatens to nuke them but because they don't know what he might do. He will negotiate and do it from strength.He could take the "black lives matter" group and show them how to make black lives matter. Who else could take a Section 8 housing project and give the people who live there a chance to see it as great and help to transform it into just that? If he invested our money in it, he would expect it to be great. Would it be opulent? No, but it could be a functional place where they could learn to make something great and then translate that to a sustainable living. Who else in the field of candidates has the tenacity to make things great? Who else has made payroll, put up with regulations, paid vendors, made customers happy enough to come back, and then paid 35 percent of his profit to an inefficient, deceptive, self-serving government?I have done tax returns for many, many years. For the "rich" and the poor, the successful and those whose businesses have failed. I have heard many promises from politicians about fixing our tax system, but none of them understand the reality of the pain or the stupidity of our tax laws like I believe Trump does. He uses the current system to pay minimal taxes, just like all my clients do. Good for him. Because of his history, I believe he could/would put H&R Block out of business, and kill my (tax) business too. I look forward to him being successful in that.Are there other candidates in the field I like? Yes. But I think they might try to get along with everyone in Washington. I don't want someone to get along with people in Washington. I want someone who is willing to tell many in Washington "You're Fired.”(Jump to table of contents)I wanted to explain why I'd vote for Trump. There are 2 main reasons:(Jump to table of contents)I started taking him seriously when he explained why he wants to run for president: Simply because he wants to make America great again. You could say bull, he's just in it for himself. But being president is not very lucrative in comparison to his current position. He gave up hundreds of millions of dollars by leaving The Apprentice. He makes $400 million a year doing what he does right now. This tells me something about Trump. He truly wants to help. He isn't in it for the money because the opportunity cost of him being president instead of doing other things is massive. If he only wanted money he would not be running for president.And he is a moderate. The political parties have a huge problem where they always select the candidates that have the same exact views as them. Trump’s problem, according to the rest of the GOP, is that he wants single-payer health care and that he doesn't want to completely defund Planned Parenthood. I don't agree with him but why is it a bad thing to be moderate? A moderate has a special ability to be a liaison between the parties. In my opinion, a president should be the president, the leader, the idol of the entire population. That is not possible with someone who is far left or far right. That alienates 50% of the country. A moderate can be the president of everyone. He can compromise, give a little, take a little. Trump is capable of this. So are other candidates, but show me someone who knows negotiation like Trump. He can take two opposing views and negotiate until everyone is happy. (Trump is not partisan as his past switches between parties shows). You may say he flip-flops on ideas. To me that shows fluidity, the ability to see what the people want and understand their views and act on those. Current politicians could care less what we want.(Jump to table of contents)Although I am not yet committed to any candidate, I nevertheless do see the value in a Donald Trump candidacy. To be entirely honest, his appeal is more emotional than rational. I know this is not the best way to begin an endorsement, but having admitted that, I still believe he is the right candidate for today’s America.Trump hasn’t elaborated much on any practical policy endeavors he would pursue. However, I think the bulk of his appeal comes through his defiance of the prevailing culture of political correctness among the media and academia. Although a seemingly minor issue relative to the economy or foreign policy, political correctness ignites conservative blogs and social media more than anything else. Beyond speech codes, “trigger warnings,” or Twitter outrage mobs, the preeminence of political correctness among the culture class indicates a momentous shift away from formerly prominent middle-class cultural values and towards something entirely different. Even if Donald Trump were to accomplish little in his presidency, I think there is a hope that were he president, he could in some way alter that prevailing Washington/media culture and set a new cultural tone.Many would probably question why, of all people, a decadent, rude, and pompous billionaire should be trusted to meddle with American culture? I think it comes down to a perception that America has already drowned in a post-modernist nightmare of moral relativism, from which extreme political correctness and protest culture stem. Trump, on the other hand, is all absolutes. Everything he says, accurate or not, is stated in absolute, definitive terms. His personal morality is clear: He respects people who work hard, are loyal, innovate, and “win,” and he shuns those who don’t meet the criteria. Cruel as it may sound, I think America needs to reenergize these fundamental cultural values before we can ever hope to create a better society.(Jump to table of contents)Why trust Trump? The political system has been set up against the public for years. There is no difference between the Republicans and Democrats; they are just tools to divide & conquer the people. The presidency is a joke! Trump is the wild card. Do I trust him? Not necessarily, but I definitely don't trust a lot of the other "candidates". It really doesn't matter who becomes president; it still doesn't give the American people any power. At least with Trump, I'll be greatly entertained & maybe, just maybe, he can shake up the system. Many are right; it's not about trusting Trump; it's a collective middle finger to the establishment. A side note: do you know how the middle finger got its meaning? It started during a war, when one side cut off the rebels' bow-shooting fingers. The rebels learned to shoot their bows w/their middle fingers and lifted their middle fingers in defiance at the next battle. Basically saying, no matter what you do, we will continue to fight for our freedom: the epitome of rebellion. Trump is the voice of some Americans. And that voice isn't saying we hate illegal immigrants lol. It's saying that we are sick of the corrupt political system, we know the game and we're done playing it. If that means making Trump president, so be it. Hell, if Bozo the clown was running, I would vote for him. It would more accurately portray what I think of the government and politicians lol. Trump isn't stupid, he gets it. He knows the more outrageous, the better. He knows it's all a joke.It's just amazing that you don't.(Jump to table of contents)I still have reservations about Trump. However, these reservations have nothing to do with his flip-floppy character or his arrogant and selfish demeanor. It has more to do with his lack of effectively communicating what his policies would be and what his plan for the country is. We shall see if he can develop positions strong enough to sway the electorate. That's not what I wrote to you to say though. Deep down many Americans know our country is in a state of total failure. That's true for folks on the left and the right. We know that our futures have been sold and that our children's futures have been sold. We know that every politician we have to choose from is a liar and a flip-flopper. With all due respect, Obama is chief of these as of late and even many of his past supporters know this now.Speaking from the right, I believe that Trump embodies the frustration and rage of the white middle class. This is his main support base and is an ever shrinking group that no longer feels they have a voice. Politicians pay lip service to the middle class but spend no time helping them. Black lives matter more and illegal immigrants who break the law get a free pass. Evangelical Christians in this country no longer feel that they have the right to religious freedom and have watched what they perceive as a sacred institution in marriage gutted. All the while, politicians they voted for to represent them just plain don't. Now enter Trump. This is a guy who isn't afraid to abuse the abuser. He has and will continue to humiliate the establishment politicians who try to stand up to him by exposing them for who they are. He will lash out at reporters and media crudely and without tact simply because he can. His supporters feel vindicated when he attacks those people who have misled them, a small satisfaction when your way of life is fading away. I can't disagree that he is just like them and that he is pandering to that base I just mentioned. I doubt he will win but I don't doubt that watching him lose will be entertaining and satisfying.(Jump to table of contents)It really isn't about Donald Trump. It's about the fact that many thought and believed President Obama was the "change" that they wanted in 2008. We still trusted him in 2012. All of that "hope" has died. This administration keeps telling everyone that things are better, but the middle class now knows that isn't quite true. Wall Street, the banks, and even illegal immigrants seem to be prospering more than the average American citizen. We are desperate. Desperate people do desperate things.(Jump to table of contents)Thanks for your article. I’m quite a fan of your writing and The Atlantic. I figured I’d take you up on your offer to discuss why I am voting for Donald Trump, if I get the opportunity. I live in New Jersey and usually by the time the primaries get around to me both tickets are decided. Still, I plan on voting for Trump if he is the Republican nominee and will likely pull the lever for him if he runs as an independent.A bit about my background so you don’t think I’m some sort of fire breathing know-nothing. I am a 39-year-old who earns well into the six figures as a communications executive for a hospital. I have had a long career in journalism and public relations. I have been married to my first and only wife for 12 years; she’s a nurse at a local hospital. I have two boys, aged 10 and 8. One has ADHD (my 10 year old) and one has autism (my eight year old), so I’m plugged into the disabled community. I am a devout Christian and attend a local Methodist church in my area that typically has about 450 people on a Sunday morning across two services. I’m white.There was a time in my life where I was intimately familiar with politics and enjoyed engaging in all the arguments. I think my interest stopped right around 2008 because everything started to get really nasty. I read somewhere that family members weren’t speaking to each other over political disagreements. I have one brother. He voted for Obama; I voted for McCain. We disagree politically, but he’s the only brother I have and we love each other as brothers do. I cannot imagine our political preferences coming between us. It was also around this time that I started noticing political discourse going from intellectual to downright nasty at all levels, with people losing jobs over their political views in extreme cases.Politically you could say I’m conservative, but the truth is I no longer care about the liberal vs. conservative arguments. What I want is a country that works and will continue to work for my kids and their kids. Our current elected leadership seems to have no other interest except defeating the opposition, and then when that happens, holding their position through excessive demonizing of their opponents.So why do I support Trump? Because he’s an authentic leader. I think he’s just what the country needs right now to wake it out of its stupor. We’ve got serious problems, but we spend all our time shouting about whether gays should be allowed to marry. Neither liberals nor conservatives have solid ideas about how to move us forward, and the lack of civility in our discourse prevents them from working together. What results is a paralysis that might be amusing if there wasn’t so much to be done.Why do I think Trump would be better?He’s led large organizations before. There hasn’t been much examination of his business beyond his bankruptcies and the fact that he inherited large sums. However, by all accounts he leads an enormous, diversified organization that is worth billions. This requires leadership. Leadership, by the way, is different from knowledge. When you lead a large organization you set vision, goals and expect results. You do not know every detail of every level of your organization. You can’t. The world is too complicated. You delegate and empower. You can get information when you need it and the president has no shortage of people ready to educate him on issues.He’s a negotiator. I think this part has been under-discussed, and is probably his greatest asset. He’s spent his whole life and career making deals and negotiating deals. In his own words, he negotiates to win. This is a skill, and it’s one that we should learn to value. The current presidential dichotomy has us either electing a liberal or conservative with clearly defined policy views that are not open for negotiation. How does that move us forward? We need to get creative and we need to negotiate.I believe Donald Trump will be able to do that.Let me now deal with what I think the main objections to his candidacy have been:One, he has no political experience. While he doesn’t have any elective experience, it’s not true that he doesn’t have any political experience. He’s been leading a large organization and working with officials constantly; this requires political deftness that frankly might be better than what our current elected officials have to offer.Two, he doesn’t have specific policy positions. This is a standard negotiating technique. You don’t show your hand publicly. Frankly, I like this better than electing a doctrinaire liberal or conservative who is going to Washington with predefined policy ideas that are rooted in solid philosophies and not open for debate.Three, he’s a rude blowhard. There is some merit to this. It is abundantly clear that Trump loves the spotlight, and he does say things that make you shake your head and groan. He clearly loves attention, but while this is a flaw I’m not sure it’s a fatal one.Take the Megyn Kelly flap. I think her question was misguided. It focused on his public statements. I would ask if he has ever been sued for sexual harassment by any of his employees. So far, no one has stepped forward to say that Trump was ever sexually inappropriate toward them, and if there were any out there I am sure they would have been found by now. When The Apprentice was in its first couple of hit seasons, one of the executives at the judging table was a woman. He’s also raised a daughter, Ivanka, who by all accounts is a solid business executive in her own right who loves her father. His woman problem is a bit overblown, I think.And he did make a good point during the debate. We’ve got serious problems in this country; we shouldn’t be making a big deal over the prospective president’s tone.(Jump to table of contents)Voters are used to being disappointed, accustomed to accepting partial truths from politicians, and conditioned to expect little progress from the individual that holds the office of President. The only desires left in American voters is renewed excitement, passion and hope. If a candidate can offer a glimpse of those desires, they win the support.My narrow support of Trump is simple. I am of the belief that he is conceited and arrogant enough to avoid failing in front of the world at all cost. His failings in the private sector are widely known but largely overlooked, as the financial and social failings of other candidates are as well. He is so passionately despised that the watchdogs will be working overtime on all fronts to expose even the smallest of infractions. Given his new stand against bailouts, payoffs, and favors, career politicians will jump at the opportunity to prove he is no better at conducting business in Washington than all who served before him. Asking myself, "why not?", "what's the worst that can happen?" and realizing that Trump is as likely to utterly ruin this country as he is to become the knight in shining armor is enough for me. Policy changes can be difficult to pull off (especially if Congress has a majority leaning in the opposite direction) and collectively make little lasting difference in the day to day lives of the average household. Gone are the days of Roosevelt and Reagan where real difference lasts for generations. If Trump fails to keep his word, he is yet another politician exploiting the office while benefiting himself, his partners, and his friends. Every choice, every vote and every dollar spent in support is a gamble. If by some unlikely chance Trump is able to follow through with any of his promises to the People, it was worth the gamble.(Jump to table of contents)In The Great Gatsby, narrator Nick Carraway describes his attraction to the main character in the novel: "When I came back from the East last autumn I felt that I wanted the world to be in uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever: I wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the human heart. Only Gatsby, the man who gives his name to this book, was exempt from my reaction--Gatsby who represented everything for which I have an unaffected scorn. If personality is an unbroken series of successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he were related to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten thousand miles away. This responsiveness had nothing to do with that flabby impressionabilty which is dignified under the name of ‘creative temperment’--it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and which it is not likely I shall ever find again...”Perhaps Nick Carraway is representative of the disillusioned "Silent Majority" wishing to "Make America Great Again." Donald Trump personifies a modern-day, extremely brash Jay Gatsby, clawing feverishly for that elusive "green light" at the end of Daisy Buchanan's beckoning dock. Is it not better to place your chips on hopes and dreams rather than certain nightmares? Those of us who buy into Trump's vision, nearly to the point of blind trust, are loudly professing our disgust with the current immoral situations that taint and threaten our blueprint of the American dream:Carraway further states: "...Gatsby turned out all right in the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what foul dust floated in the wake of his dreams, that temporarily closed out my interest in the abortive sorrows and the short-winded elations of men." The "foul dust" floating in the wake of Trump's dreams consists of a biased, unfair, unimaginative media and his fellow dull, donor-driven candidates. But Mr. Trump, as Nick said to Jay Gatsby: "You're worth the whole damn bunch put together!"So, I will happily bide my time dancing foolishly under Mr. Trump's brightly-striped tents and festive lights. Drawn to the man and his message like a moth to a flame.(Jump to table of contents)He's got what obama had in 2007 except he doesn't have the press adoring him and hiding what should have been disqualifiers. Trump is refreshingly blunt, honest, and pro American. He's the anti-Obama. People like that. The press doesn't. (Jump to table of contents)So why Trump? It is not because he is a Republican candidate or because he expresses conservative positions. It is not just because he is a political outsider and speaks his mind with no apologies. I support Trump because he is the picture of American greatness. Donald Trump's grandfather, Friedrich, emigrated to New York City from Germany in 1885 and, from humble beginnings (he worked first as a barber), began working toward the American Dream. Fast-forward 100 years later and Donald Trump is the inheritor of a strong work ethic and the richness that is possible only in a free country. Not only is he the inheritor, but he is the embodiment.Think about the greatness of the American 20th Century. Think about Fred Astaire or Michael Jackson enchanting the world with dance. Think about John F. Kennedy or Ronald Reagan inspiring the world with leadership. Think of Babe Ruth, Martin Luther King Jr., Fred Rogers. The American 20th Century was a great one. Now think about the American headlines of today. What do you think of? War? Poverty? Political division? What are celebrities like today? Do we see greatness in America still on a daily basis or even in the movies? The Trump Family is the picture of the American Dream, and I believe Donald Trump is an honest man. When Donald Trump says that he wants to make America great again, I believe him. He has written books for all to read but that is not enough. He wants to lead.Granted, Donald Trump cannot promise greatness among us as a society or a country. However, he can promise to be a leader for greatness, and he is fitted to do so.Trump's foreign and domestic political positions are important and they matter. I am an independent voter and look forward to hearing more about his intentions as the political season rolls along. However, am I sold on his leadership? Yes, I am. Do I believe his courage? Yes, I do. I am relieved that he is not the traditional politician and is not speaking on behalf of his donors. The political system is broken and we need a true outsider to change the way things work. Yes, I know about those pictures with Hillary Clinton. Trump has always been a businessman first and has maintained an abundance of relations. This is a man with a huge network.Trump is not the caricature that pundits would have you believe. Trump did not build his economic empire just with luck. As a Trump supporter, if I could ask anything from the American people, it would be respect. Please have respect for the family and fortune of this man. This is not just a man, this is the American Dream.(Jump to table of contents)I respect your point of view and understand why you might find support for Trump puzzling. I support Trump because I believe that he will take a management approach similar to Steve Jobs. He will sucker in talent, tell them that their work is terrible, push them to achieve beyond what they think is possible, and then take credit for their successes as he tells America, and the world, that their projects are the best thing that has ever happened. This works. It's not pretty, but it works.I think your critique regarding Trump serving his self-interest does not really connect with the personal satisfaction that would come with a high approval rating as President of United States. No amount of money can stroke an ego relative to that honor. Also, he would have the nuclear codes and be commander of the largest military in the world. That would be cool for him––super fun, no doubt.Unlike some of the other candidates striving for the Republican nomination, Trump is not a dummy. He once supported certain liberal ideas that make sense, like single-payer health care, rather than consistently spewing the party line or something to the right of it. As a centrist, that appeals to me. I think he says vile things at times, and is disrespectful, but a lack of respect can be a powerful tool when challenging the status quo. In short, you don't have to be a good person to be the right person for a job.As a kicker, every day he is in office, it would be entertaining. And I'm sure his rhetoric would assuage those members of our society, myself included, who are comfortable and powerful amongst our social groups. That means a lot to me, and to the people who can afford to contribute to campaigns. And Trump doesn't even need my money. It’s a win/win Conor. Someday, when you're not such a loser, you will probably see it yourself.(Jump to table of contents)You raise some good points in your article, especially when you refer to his two ex-wives. I hadn't thought about that. I also read the previous article you wrote about Trump, and I thought that it was also well thought out, and you sound like a decent person and you aren't putting me down because I support Trump (I have 3 degrees - B.A., Ed. M., M.A.).When Barack Obama was elected, I cried for the country. We were doomed. I was not a McCain supporter but I voted for him anyway. I have been holding my nose and voting Republican for the past 40 plus years. George H.W. Bush lied to us when he said he wouldn't raise taxes. Bill Clinton lied to us when he said that he didn't have sex with that woman, and in the OVAL OFFICE of all places - that's my House, not his house.Al Gore was the bathtub ring around Bill Clinton and he was smug and sanctimonious at the debates, and so G.W. Bush was a better choice and maybe he would govern as a conservative and be like Reagan. Then everything went to hell. Then we got Obama who governs against the will of the people––I do not think Obama loves America and I think he is trying to destroy this country. Whatever did the Democrats see in Obama? Well, maybe that's what we see in Trump. Maybe he is our version of Obama. Maybe everything you say about Trump is true.But I know that Trump, unlike Obama, loves America. Trump has never lied to me whereas all of the other Republican politicians (like McConnell & Boehner) have. They don't fight for my side. They cave to Obama ahead of time. Nobody fights for my side. Trump fights. Trump wins. I want an Alpha Male who is going to take it to the enemy. I am tired of supporting losers. I used to vote for President based on their positions. Now I am going to vote for President based on emotion. I want a strong man to be president, an Alpha male, somebody who is going to rip the other side a new one. I am tired of losing the fight before we even have a fight. That is why I support Donald Trump. Ted Cruz is my second choice. Never Jeb!(Jump to table of contents)Per your request: 1. Of all the candidates, ONLY TRUMP has ever BUILT any REAL THINGS. 2. I only have ONE vote. It goes to the man who BUILT REAL THINGS. 3. Five decades of voting for ne'er-do-wells who've never built anything but EMPTY five-point plans is five decades too many. NEVER AGAIN!(Jump to table of contents)You asked Trump supporters why we trust that he will keep his word and work for our interests. I find it unlikely that any of the other candidates would work towards my interests, so to an extent there's nothing really to lose. That said, the first reason I'd give for trusting Trump is that he had this same rhetoric toward China and Japan all the way back in the late 1980s. For example, he made an appearance on Oprah Winfrey back on April 25, 1988, where he discussed a full page ad criticizing U.S foreign policy. He discussed the issues with Japanese trade at that time. At the very least, the hallmark of his campaign, trade and foreign policy issues, is something that he has remained consistent on. Here's a link to the clip.In addition, his position on immigration has remained largely the same as well.
In Donald Trump's first political book, The America We Deserve, Donald Trump writes:On the two primary issues as to why I'm supporting Mr. Trump he has remained stunningly consistent.Even if he is unable to get Chinese currency manipulation to stop, his support of a tariff and bringing back protectionist trade policies, which turned the U.S into one of the most prosperous nations in the world, would be a welcome reprieve from the Chamber of Commerce cartel politicians like Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush who drive American workers out of their jobs, depressing their wages with foreign labor.(Jump to table of contents)I am a "possible Trump" supporter. I have many apprehensions. I am sick and tired of politics as is. I am MORE concerned about Republican Party. I have been so disappointed with the gutless reactions of most. My original "dream team" was West/Cruz. Since West refused to run, Cruz is my man. HOWEVER, can he win? I'm out here in Mexifornia, and other than my Conservative Forum group, NO ONE knows Cruz.BUT, EVERYONE Knows TRUMP.We have a horrendous problem with illegal aliens, sanctuary cities & crimes. Trump has brought this FRONT & CENTER. He even had parents of slain victims.He touched some very sensitive nerves. I am thankful for his support and I am "Trusting" that he will treat AMERICA as a business & focus on her sucess. I PRAY he is serious and sincere. I realize as a businessman a lot of hanky panky goes on and I PRAY that Trump is FOCUSED on USA. Time will tell. For now, I'm a watcher.(Jump to table of contents)Ok, first off, I am just a little cog in the big wheel of life! Why am I voting for Trump you ask? Very simple! The Reds and the Blues of this country have had plenty of time to get the situation under control and they have proven that they are incapable of getting the job done! Nero Plays as Rome Burns! And the Senators are hiding and licking their wounds like scared sheep! Enter The Donald!Like him or hate him, he is a businessman and he has the Tiger by the Tail! The Tiger is the common working man in this country that is tired of Politics and Washington continuing to screw us over in the process of ruining the country we all love! We want to give a businessman the chance to prove that this country can be great again! All the Dems can come up with is a Socialist, a confirmed habitual liar and the village idiot! The Repubs have all their faith in a Shrub that can't even speak to a group and make sense. The rest are milling around trying to fake that they can keep up! Politics is in the dumper and just maybe the best hope for America is The Donald!Trump '16'P.S. I hope he picks Sarah Palin for a running mate!(Jump to table of contents)Mr. Trump is truthful. Good or bad, the truthfulness of his words are as clear as a breath of fresh air spoken from a foundation of experience and wisdom with a dash of enthusiasm. Lies are out, unrehearsed truth is in.What you see is what you see, all the cards are on the table, the words are non-rehearsed, flowing forth and engendering a sense of trust. In all the other candidates, this one foundational factor, truth, is not found… honor and integrity is lacking in one fashion or another, replaced by spin and sleight of hand. Mr. Trump is standing tall above the tainted political refuse beneath. We stood for something once. None of us wants to hear we as a nation are defective from the Oval Office.(Jump to table of contents)You asked for it. Here is my pedantic speech on why I will be voting for Trump!First: he has brought to life the silent majority, who have quietly fumed about the corruption that runs rampant in our government. Our government merrily believes they have pulled the wool over our eyes to the atrocities they routinely commit. Trump has taken these atrocities Mainstream! He daily reminds all the crooked politicians that they have been bought and paid for! The People knew it before, but Trump is reminding us that it is NOT acceptable! It is NOT wrong that Trump has given money to these people to do his bidding, it IS WRONG that these people took his money and DID his bidding! We get that Trump gave them money for a few little building permits––but what do the Koch Bros, George Soros and especially the drug and insurance companies need to give them money for? He is a Motivator!Second: People used to getting their own way grow angry at Trump because he is stepping on their toes. We are encouraged that he is doing the right thing. We watch Fox News and the RNC stab him in the back repeatedly despite his being a wildly popular Republican candidate that they should be embracing. And we ask ourselves, what does he know? What could he tell us that we don’t already suspect? We want to know what is so super-special secret that other billionaires are trying to trip up one of their own! Wouldn't you think they would want one of their own in the catbird seat?Third, Trump calls out the media routinely, the same media that is failing to accurately portray the situation in Ferguson and other towns and makes it seem like there is a huge race war going on. The media who is so agenda-based and who fail gloriously to state the unbiased facts. The media who are intent on manipulating people to vote for who they say and to believe what they say and to follow how they say. The media, who originally was designed to JUST REPORT THE FACTS and is now the primary engine with which our leaders and government controls the masses who blindly follow them. The people hate the media, but when Joe Schmoe complains about a news program lying, no one hears him. When Donald Trump complains about a news program lying, EVERYONE hears him!Fourth, it is because we have watched for the last 100+ years as government officials made decisions that are appalling and destructive to the well-being of our great nation, and we think to ourselves, "WTH did they do something that grossly derelict for?"Trump tells us it is because our leaders are stupid. We know the truth, it is because our leaders are CROOKED! Trump gets a bye here and the reason is this - from Trump's perspective, the politicians he purchases like candy do seem extremely stupid. He watches them selling out their own kind for a few bucks and think how truly silly they look to him. You see it time and again throughout history.Traitors are never respected by the people they turncoat to!Our choice is simple: we absolutely dont want to elect someone who is disdained by the Donald. We've had our fair share of Vasili Mitrokhins. Donald is travelling in many of the same circles as the leaders of other countries and you may forget that the US is a very powerful country and has enormous leverage in the hands of the right negotiator. Our current negotiator sold us out for a cheap farm in Egypt and even sold out his own daughter for goodness sakes, will she be wife number 3 or 4??? Donald knows that he has a very valuable asset and will use it to every advantage.It is his nature to make the best deal possible!Fifth: Trump is a negotiator and his experience speaks volumes. Granted, maybe he will negotiate deals that benefit him. However, Trump is a real-estate Tycoon and many of his holdings are here in the good ole USofA, so if any one would negotiate a real deal that would benefit our country for a change, it would be Trump! While Trump may very well have his own best interests at heart it's ok: his best interest is our best interest and that best interest is our property values and our economy. When our economy tanks, his property values go DOWN! If anyone would be interested in saving our country, it would be someone whose salary is directly tied to the value of the country we call the USA! It doesn’t do any good if you own 10 beautiful hotels and golf courses in these United States if there is not anyone who can visit them! Atlantic City, which he is continually questioned about, is a perfect example. Trump didnt destroy the economy in Atlantic City, its economy tanked and Trump's businesses with it. I like to think he would have a vendetta against the politician that sold out Atlantic City and by association, Trump.Sixth, it is because of questions like yours from people who don’t see the need to dream or hope for a greater America and are content to keep watching it go by the wayside as long as their pockets are lined. People who are waiting until we are no better than Zimbabwe, where the biggest crime is to be a white Man! These same people who won’t take a risk or jump off a sinking ship because they haven't finished their lobster!
In summation, it’s because WE still believe our country can be great again and WE need a leader to go before us that embodies our beliefs, one whose life is affected by our lives.A few hundred years ago, our ancestors came to this country for a fresh start because their homeland had become unbearable to live in. This land was the LAST frontier! Our backs are against the wall now: we do not have any other land to which we can all sail our rickety boats with our few belongings! We do not have any other leader who embodies all that we believe. Our forefathers may have thought "America or Bust"––we are now at the "Bust" part and if we don’t fix our great country! So in conclusion, he is our Joan D'Arc, repeatedly betrayed by his own kind and given to lead us at his own expense! He is fighting OUR battle and it is OUR responsibility to back him!
p.s. Oh, and did I mention: he is NOT politically correct and Americans are so fed up with political correctness. You cannot imagine how refreshing it is to see a human that talks like we talk, who is passionate about his beliefs, and who maybe words things not quite right, but who the hell cares? No one gets it right the first time. Hell, I rewrote parts of that email to you 6 times hahaha - enjoy!!!(Jump to table of contents)I don't live in Iowa or New Hampshire but if I did, I'd vote for Trump right now. Don't get me wrong; I don't believe he'd make a good President. Quite the opposite. I'd vote for Trump, the candidate, purely for the comedic value.Trump is like a train wreck. Not the kind where hundreds of people get hurt. No, Trump's candidacy is like the train wreck in Green Eggs and Ham by Dr. Seuss––it just keeps getting more and more absurd as it careens down the mountainside and finally plunges off the cliff. It's funny, even to a 3-year-old. In many ways, Trump is the ultimate comedic actor who never breaks character. We are all watching a mockumentary and I, for one, am not ready for the show to end quite yet.(Jump to table of contents)Thank you for being curious about what people think, something that the mainstream media has long forgotten about. The problem: you assume to know the reasons why people support Trump––that we believe he will be a more caring and responsible president with a lesser self-interest. Honestly, I don't think there is a single person in the world who believes that about the Donald. Here are the reasons why we like Trump. First, some insight into how many of the people around me feel about the world and its recent history:1) Bush: we learned that an administration can be careless, brutal, dishonest and deceptive to an extent no one would have thought possible. $10 trillion destroyed, 5000+ Americans killed, the American brand destroyed; torture, lies and terrible people representing America. These people represented the Washington establishment, and created an atmosphere of total distrust in anything established. The poor and underprivileged felt cheated on and totally left behind; the wealthy and educated watched in total disbelief how the layers of civilized discourse and governance where obliterated by incompetence, cronyism and evilness on an epic scale. The world went into shock, losing America as its first and last hope.It was a––watch for it––DISASTER.2) Obama: I supported Obama the first time, and reluctantly the second time. I think he saved America. BUT. Obama failed big time in overcoming the partisan divide. He put his cronies in charge. Worst of all, he appears weak. Like an intellectual. Intellectuals make simple things complicated, and FAIL in real life. Because while real life may be complicated, you create progress by making it simple. By getting things done. Stop thinking, start doing. Stop considering, make a decision.Yes, go with your gut (unless you are Bush, because your gut sucks).3) The two parties: So basically, going with your gut failed (Bush) and going with your brain feels like a failure too (Obama). That's because the personnel, especially on the gut side, is just terrible. Absolutely terrible. Cruz? Perry? BUSH? Palin? Romney? McCain? Where do these people come from? How can they happen? On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton might be a good person, maybe even a good president, but she is a terrible politician and so, so bad in talking to us. Just so bad.IT'S ALL SO BAD!4) The media: CNN has catvideos on their homepage. MSNBC has followed FOX to become a blatant agenda-setting propaganda machine. Their pundits don't serve the viewers, but their own personal agenda. It's political correctness and propaganda all over the place. Listen, I have my beliefs. But I am annoyed at these people, even if they propagate my beliefs, because of the stupid, obnoxious way they do it.Take pro-choice vs. pro-life, and the gay marriage debate. Where do I stand on these topics? I am PRO STARTUPS. We need more entrepreneurs. We need more innovation. More growth. How is that related to pro-choice and gay marriage? IT ISN'T. I DON'T CARE. I AM NOT INTERESTED. STOP TALKING ABOUT IT! We don't care.Gays can now marry, that's fine with me. Abortion has been regulated for decades exactly how it should be regulated. It's fine. It's a non-issue. We have to stop talking about complete nonsense, and start talking about Making America Great Again. Oh, and every time the media tries to put him down, his polls will go up. Because everything Americans can do to show the media they are wrong, they will do at this point.5) Trump: So here we are. That's why I like Trump. Everytime I see another spineless, dumb, corrupt politician preparing for another failure (representing it all: BUSH), I have to close my laptop. It's so, so unbelievable and gross. Every time I see MSNBC and the NYT stuff their agendas down my throat, I have to throw up.Fox? I don't even go there. Obama? He has failed to make D.C. work. So there is Trump. Someone who finally, finally focuses on important topics. He says the obvious: illegal immigration is a disaster. Obamacare is very bad, but not for the reasons the right claims. Planned Parenthood is important for millions of young women, and defunding it is another GOP scandal. The Democrats suck so much he doesn't even attack them. He says that ISIS can be destroyed by going for their oil and their Saudi backers. Umm... that's the most profound and smart thing I have heard in a long time.He says we get ripped off by the Chinese and Mexican governments. Umm... Yes. He says foreign policy is dealmaking, and he will force Putin, Iran etc. into submission, and they will be happy about it (because it will be a good deal). Umm... yes he is right. Of course, the pundits and academic elites are piling on how he has no idea about economics and foreign policy, and how he is a fraud that dumb people fall for.Guess what? They just called me dumb. Now here is the problem. The arrogance and ignorance––together, the dumbness––of these "elites" at the NYT, economics departments, etc. is the true source of misinterpretation of the Trump movement. We are not dumb. We are investment bankers, Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, rocket scientists. And yes, we might also be farmers, but farmers can actually also be quite smart.But guess what. We believe YOU (not you, Conor), are very, very dumb. If you are an established economist, you understand NOTHING about economics, and now everyone knows it. If you are the NYT, you printed fake evidence that led to a corrupt and bankrupting war. We believe you are very, very dumb, and shouldn't say anything, whatsoever. You lost ALL authority over the last 15 years. Most people around me could take on any NYT journalist or professor from whatever fancy school and destroy them––intellectually––on any stage, anytime. We laugh at these people, and we laugh when they are called "elites". They are not elites, they are complete failures.They have a poor understanding of the world we live in, they do not understand economics, they do not understand foreign policy. They respond by saying we are the angry, disenfranchised mob in the South and Midwest. The problem is that we are technology entrepreneurs and finance professionals in New York and Silicon Valley.Many of us probably sit next door to you.And every time you paint this picture, it strengthens our belief that you are so intellectually stuck and close-minded it's not even worth talking to you anymore. If you think Trump, Carl Icahn and Steve Schwarzman are disenfranchised angry people who don't understand economics or foreign policy, something is wrong with you.All this ignorance is also why Bernie Sanders is so popular. And I bet there are more Bernie Sanders supporters who also like Trump than the "experts" think. I am one of them. My second choice would be Bernie Sanders. It is not hard to lead the U.S. The U.S. is an amazing country that has everything we need. All a president has to do is not to be a completely incompetent moron, do a deal here and there, and make sure the most obvious things get done. It is really, really easy. But for some reason, we can't get a candidate through the party system that is not a completely incompetent moron. And no, we don't think Donald Trump is in it to help us.Or anyone else other than himself.But he has his pride. He truly wants to make America Great Again, the same way he wanted to make his company great. He is unlikely to fail as a president, because he doesn't like to lose. It's that simple. And I truly trust him with that. Also, gross cronyism requires a small mind. Someone with the grandesse of a Donald will not do little crony cheats. There are a series of different concerns I have based on his personality, but they all pale in comparison to many past presidents and the current options and I have to stop my rantings now. If you really read through all this, I am very impressed. Thanks for opening up a channel. If you write a piece that explains the Trump phenomenon accurately, you will be famous. Interview a bunch of (diverse) supporters, analyze who they are and why they support him.It will help America.(Jump to table of contents)I think Trump is a "ego-maniac." And on his resume he would like to add the moniker of the man who gave America a shove back toward being number one again. It has nothing to do with liking his personality, his way of doing things or NOT DOING them. Because he is 'crazy impulsive' he has no qualms to step on toes when he is on a roll, and correctness (neither political nor ethical) enters in his objective. So in my opinion, Trump is the only person in the playing field who could chop off heads, feet, or other current government extremities, which get in the way of what "most Americans" see as a path to make America over for Americans and "strong again"! An egotist who will not take "no" as an answer...Trump’s objective is to prove what he has said publicly is true.(Jump to table of contents)We need a President who is a real leader who can actually do something to reverse the course. We do not need good sound bytes or the most diehard conservative. We need a Patton. No other candidate comes close to his real world record of actually doing the things that our Country needs to reverse the death spiral.The American people know this.(Jump to table of contents)You'll be surprised and maybe alarmed to know there is a huge segment of the base of both parties that Trump is tapping into. I want you to know that Trump supporters are not just the lunatic fringe or angry people looking to join a movement or blow off steam. I continue to read these kind of articles and I come away thinking you don't realize the scope of the growing support out there for Trump.I'm a conservative Republican who has been actively involved in Politics for 25 years. I truly love America. In my view, this country is going in the wrong direction and is in real trouble. Here are my concerns: the debt; the economy; radical Islamic terrorism; illegal immigration; creating a simpler, fairer tax code that includes all Americans paying taxes, not just 50% of us; preserving social security; reducing entitlement and welfare programs; protecting religious freedoms; and supporting and keeping strong our military. Neither side will seriously address these issues and get done the positive things that we need to get done.I'm a college graduate, I have a Family, I work in an executive-level management position for a Fortune 500 company and I'm a homeowner. What I think you may find interesting is that I have a circle of friends, both men and women, who have similar concerns and backgrounds. We are all employed with excellent careers and we all are supporting Trump for President. We love how Trump unabashedly trumpets how he loves America and wants to make America great again. Second, he's not politically correct.Political correctness is a main reason why America is in trouble because it is a grind and so draining to be so politically correct everyday in our personal and professional lives.The sensitivity is over the top and counter productive.Third, Trump does have the experience, the intellect and the leadership credentials. I realize the points you were trying to make in your article, however, you are totally discounting any positive attributes that Trump has. Fourth, none of us are perfect, I have changed my mind on positions, I have had failed relationships, I have not always been so successful in my career. We are all human and flawed, and it just seems that it's easier for the haters to focus on the negative and not the totality of the Man, who like it or not has built an amazingly successful company and a beautiful Family. And I'm ready to give Trump a chance.(Jump to table of contents)It is not that Trump supporters necessarily trust Trump to be their champion or that he can be relied upon to deliver better than other politicians. It is the confidence that he can't do worse (and just might do better). In the meantime, his supporters relish the contempt he shows toward the mainstream media and politicians (a contempt which is shared not just by Tea Party conservatives, but many educated liberals and independents). I am a Bernie Sanders supporter. But if I had to vote for any Republican, it would certainly be Trump. In a face off between Hillary Clinton and Trump, I again would vote Trump. While he might not deliver on his promises, he would certainly be a bull in the China shop of contemporary American politics, which has long needed destroying and rebuilding.(Jump to table of contents)I'm in my early 30s and I grew up in San Francisco in a liberal home. And I have a very difficult time keeping up with all the various appropriate and inappropriate terms used to reference people and their causes.Trump makes brash and uncompromising statements about issues many people feel very passionate about. When he spoke about illegal immigration he made statements that many people agree with and are afraid to state. A lot of that fear is a fear of being labeled a racist or a fear of violating constantly changing societal norms. It's frustrating to listen to politicians speak and make no statements. It's even more frustrating to watch politicians fold in the presence of the slightest bit of pressure. The appeal of Trump isn't because they trust him to make the right decisions, it’s the hope that he will influence the rest of the field to make strong statements regardless of the media backlash.(Jump to table of contents)

