In a debate filled with barbs, put-downs, interruptions, and insults, Donald Trump didn’t separate himself from the rest of the field by being more combative or more outrageous—although at moments, he was clearly trying. Trump, instead, set himself apart by delivering a ringing defense of the “New York values” that Senator Ted Cruz accused him of embodying. “New York is a great place,” he said. “It's got great people, it's got loving people, wonderful people. When the World Trade Center came down, I saw something that no place on Earth could have handled more beautifully, more humanely than New York.” His tone turned somber:And the people in New York fought and fought and fought, and we saw more death, and even the smell of death—nobody understood it. And it was with us for months, the smell, the air. And we rebuilt downtown Manhattan, and everybody in the world watched and everybody in the world loved New York and loved New Yorkers.It was Trump’s best moment of the campaign: a stirring tribute to a cosmopolitan city, and an invocation of national unity, beating back a crude attempt to divide Americans against each other.What preceded it was less inspiring. Trump stood by his contention that Ted Cruz may not be a “native-born citizen,” and therefore may be ineligible for the presidency. Cruz hotly disputed that, and the weight of the scholarly consensus is firmly on his side. It was vintage Trump: blustering, insinuating, and flat-out fabricating. And it helped make the defense of New York that followed seem even more unusual.That exchange also stood out because so much of the other drama on the stage Thursday night seemed so familiar. Ben Carson affably flubbed his foreign-policy questions; John Kasich emphasized his record in Ohio and tried to look more serious than his rivals; Jeb Bush delivered solid points in a style that robbed them of most of their impact; Chris Christie talked up his record as a prosecutor while brazenly denying other things he’s done; and Cruz sparred repeatedly with Marco Rubio.With just a few weeks left before Iowa voters head to the caucuses, almost all of the candidates came to North Charleston, South Carolina, looking to shake things up. For the most part, that failed to happen.But Ted Cruz, who’s clinging to a narrow lead in Iowa, didn’t just take hits from Trump. The fiercest attack of the night came from Rubio, who rattled off a detailed list of specific stands on which he accused the Texas senator of reversing himself, branding him a cynical opportunist, not a consistent conservative. “I appreciate your dumping your oppo-research folder on the debate stage,” Cruz smirked.“No, it’s your record,” Rubio shot back.The debate also featured a war over trade wars. Trump was pressed to defend past comments supportive of slapping retaliatory tariffs on Chinese imports. Instead of backing away from tariffs, he stressed the need for a firm response to the rising power. Economists across the country held their heads, and his rivals gleefully pounced. But as they took turns explaining the economic theory of why tariffs ultimately hurt consumers, Trump simply insisted that he’d be tough enough to make the Chinese crumble. By Friday, there will likely be dozens of columns explaining the downsides of tariffs; whether any of them will dissuade Trump supporters from believing that he alone has the resolve to right America’s trade deficit with China is another matter entirely.It’s equally fair to wonder whether any of these performances will alter the trajectory of the race. Trump was closing in on Cruz in Iowa even before the debate, and riding high in the national polls. Marco Rubio turned in another superb performance on the stage, but his past skill as a debater has never brought him the surge of support that he needs to challenge the frontrunners. Ben Carson’s fading campaign will continue to fade. Jeb Bush, Chris Christie, and John Kasich are still jockeying for establishment support.One thing that was different on Thursday night was the audience, generously salted with members of the Republican National Committee, in town for their winter meeting. The presence of the literal Republican establishment didn’t restrain candidates from touting their outsider credentials. But it did reflect the tensions roiling the party, as parts of the crowd cheered loudly for Trump, as others booed.But if RNC Chair Reince Preibus was worried, he didn’t let it show. “It’s clear we’ve got the most well-qualified and diverse field of candidates from any party in history,” he tweeted afterwards. The field may be yuuge, but the candidates are the best. The head of the Republican establishment adopting the argot of Trump seemed a perfect end to the night.Carson: “If my mother were Secretary of the Treasury, we would not be in a deficit situation.”There was a trade war over trade wars on stage just now. Trump understands trade, but he also understands audiences—and he’s unrelenting in his attacks on China, and the need to take a harder line. Other candidates—Kasich, Rubio, Bush, Cruz—try hard to deliver textbook explanations of the dangers of tariffs. But for Trump, this is all about showing toughness toward a rising China. And he seems to carry a large chunk of the crowd with him.Trump: “There's something going on. And it's bad.”That invocation of inchoate fear is a perfect encapsulation of his campaign.When Donald Trump takes a long, detailed question, and answers with a flat, “No,” it draws cheers every time. In this case, he’s asked whether he wants to reverse his proposal for banning Muslims from entering the United States. There have been boos from this crowd tonight, but it’s hushed as he refuses to back away from bigotry, and cheers when he’s finished.The moderator just presumed that the right thing to do is removing Assad from power––but Ted Cruz, Donald Trump, and perhaps others on that stage disagree, and believe the U.S. should focus on fighting ISIS in cooperation with Russia.Cruz is asked what he means when he accuses Trump of holding New York values. “I think most people know exactly what New York values are,” says Cruz. It’s a remarkable spectacle—a candidate for president implying that being a citizen of its largest city is somehow un-American.The stress on the vital importance of mental-health care is a welcome development; Trump is absolutely right that states have shifted resources away from treatment in the past several decades. But better mental-health care is unlikely to curb gun violence, because very little of it is committed by the mentally ill. There’s a basic disconnect between these answers and the data.“Neil, I was mentioned, too,” interjects Carson. “You were?”“Yeah, he said everybody.”Well, good for Carson. As long as the moderators are going to construe the rules this absurdly, he might as well get a word in.Is Cruz eligible to be president? Earlier today, we published a detailed legal memorandum written by Bryan Garner, editor in chief of Black's Law Review, and a distinguished research professor of law at Southern Methodist University. It’s the most thorough exploration of the legal questions I’ve seen—and tries to put the matter to rest once and for all. You can read it for yourself.Cruz notes that some who’ve weighed in have gone so far as to suggest that both parents of a candidate would need to be born on American soil; Trump’s mother was born in Scotland. “On the issue of citizenship, Donald, I’m not going to use your mother’s birth against you. You’re an American, as is everyone else on this stage.”Cruz gets asked about his undisclosed $750,000 loan from Goldman Sachs used to finance his election to the Senate. “Thank you for passing on that hit-piece on the front page of The New York Times,” he says. This has been a favorite tactic of Cruz’s, pivoting from the specifics of any charge he faces to attack the establishment. “Yes, I made a paperwork error, disclosing it on one piece of paper instead of the other,” he says. That’s not going to cut it. Elections experts have called it a clear violation of the rules, of the sort that’s generally sanctioned.Chris Christie says that in his administration, “tin-pot mullahs” would know better than to seize American craft. In 2001, early in the administration of George W. Bush, China held 24 American airmen for 11 days, until Bush apologized. Compared to that, the prompt return of the unharmed sailors looks less like a humiliation than a triumph.“According to our Facebook research, jobs is one of the biggest issues…” solemnly intones Fox Business’s Maria Bartiromo. Some things don’t require Facebook research to understand.The last time the Republicans debated, nine candidates took the stage, Ben Carson was a leading contender, and George Pataki’s run for office seemed all but over. Now seven are left, Carson is an afterthought, and Pataki’s candidacy is finally over.After a wild 12 months, the unpredictable 2016 presidential race has finally entered 2016, and it’s starting to settle down. Donald Trump sits atop the polls, with Ted Cruz a clear second. In Iowa, where voters will caucus on February 1, those roles are reversed—although Trump has lately been closing the gap. A host of establishment candidates are jostling for position behind them, waiting to shoot ahead if they stumble. Marco Rubio, Jeb Bush, John Kasich, and Chris Christie are hoping to survive long enough to exploit any such opportunities.As my colleague Russell Berman writes, one shift is that the long-simmering tensions between Trump and Cruz are finally out in the open. Trump has suggested that Cruz’s birth in Canada renders him ineligible to be president, while Cruz has attacked Trump’s “New York values,” which he declined to define other than to say that “they're not Iowa values and they're not New Hampshire values.” Whether that conflict will carry over to the debate stage, or whether they’d prefer to trade punches at a safe remove, remains to be seen. Ben Carson’s once high-flying campaign is locked in a tailspin, from which it seems unlikely to emerge. The other four candidates are left to decide whether to set themselves apart by punching up at the frontrunners, by trying to take down each other, or by aiming to rise above the squabbling on stage.The debate is being held in the Coliseum and Performing Arts Center in North Charleston, South Carolina. The city came to national attention last April, when Officer Michael Slager shot Walter Scott in the back as he fled, killing him. Slager, charged with murder, was released on bond last week. Ten miles away sits Emanuel A.M.E. Church. In June, Dylann Roof was welcomed to a prayer service there, sat for an hour, and then shot and killed nine. And on Tuesday night, South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley used her rebuttal to the State of the Union address to remember what happened next:We didn't turn against each other's race or religion. We turned toward God, and to the values that have long made our country the freest and greatest in the world.The debate over the use of force by police, the question of gun violence, and the challenges of pluralism have not received much attention in the Republican debates to this point. But one reason the parties now have four early states—Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Nevada—is to ensure that issues of regional and local salience make their presence felt on the campaign trail. That will be the case tonight, whether these questions take center stage, or become conspicuous by their absence.You can follow every twist and turn of the race with our 2016 Distilled election dashboard, find out more about the candidates by using our 2016 Cheat Sheet, and see how viewers are responding to the candidates with our real-time emoji tracker. And follow along with us, as we liveblog the Republican debate.  —Yoni Appelbaum

