<comment>“When it was isolated to certain low-income communities or minority communities, the tendency was [that] jail was a sufficient deterrent or approach.”It had little to do with low-income or minorities. It was a logical and first approach that governments came up with. Only after time has passed have we seen that the approach has not worked and has terrible consequences.  This was predicted by some, citing the fallout from the deterrent approach to alcohol that failed.There are plenty of other examples in which the first tool governments reached for was jail.  Gambling, for instance. Reliably the tool resulted in failure and corruption and was eventually abandoned.What purpose is served in reinforcing again the narrative that society is fixed against certain low-income or minority communities?  Even when people are being successfully  brought together Obama is unable to resist demonstrating why he is so divisive.</comment>

<comment>He's isn't making this up, it's documented in our historical record, Google the early days of drug enforcement it was targeted mainly toward low-income communities and minorities, even though whites and minorities use drugs at about the same rate. It's not a narrative without merit and it's part of a larger story. I'm sorry if the truth makes you uncomfortable.</comment>

<comment>where does the drug money taken from the busts go? to the police departments.. How about opening some rehab facilities for the addicted, so they can get treatment, or open more methadone clinics.</comment>

<comment>It would seem practical to first teach those seeking relief that physical pain can be a part of life rather than rush 'patients' to the taking of a prescription painkiller.  Were this to become a practice throughout society within this instant gratification world in which we live, who knows what benefit it might have.  Once private acts impacted public consequences and was thought 'normal', individual responsibility became largely moot.  Good societal reasons for collectively responsible, prioritized values have served us well in the past.</comment>

<comment>Avoiding physical pain isn't an example of an "instant gratification" world.Are you somebody's grandfather from 100 years ago?People shouldn't have to be in physical pain, it's not normal, and is something that should be dealt with as soon as the injury that caused it is dealt with.  There's no doubt that there has been and continues to be over-prescription of opiate-based painkillers in this country, especially with refills of what was originally 3-4 days worth of Vicodin for a simple wisdom tooth procedure, but that doesn't mean that people aren't deserving of the humanity of not dealing with unnecessary physical pain, especially when it's lasting, not just a ping here and there.There is definitely a culture of instant gratification, but to apply that to relieving physical pain is obtuse at best.  The rest of your post just reads like an all grandfather rambling on about how things were best when he was a kid, going to sock-hops and organized fist fights between kids by adults when the kids have an argument.</comment>

<comment>You're right, avoidance of physical pain does not necessarily relate to instant gratification, but it most definitely relates to living clean, free from the allure into the horrors of addiction through the use and abuse of opioid drugs. Only the individual can decide for his/herself how some physical pain in life can be managed but outside clean help is very useful,  Legal drug companies say they care but when push comes to shove the business of making more and more money trumps all.Most troubling are elected leaders who wink or guffaw at the use of illegal drugs used in their youth and subsequently pander to other illegal users for their votes because they're 'cool'. This type of nonsense is both pathetic and despicable. Legalization will only invite exponential degrees of increased societal insanity. China's approach, two in the hat immediately for all convicted dealers, is more effective.</comment>

<comment>Plenty of really rotten people are not addicted to any particular substance. Sobriety is no guarantee of virtue.</comment>

<comment>You have described to keep looking at the glass half-full, constant vigilance is a must.  Challenges are part of life.</comment>

<comment>Why does nobody talk about heroin assisted treatment/general opiate management?  It's the most proven safe, cheapest, and effective way to deal with opiate addiction of all sorts.  Just look to Switzerland, Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark and the United Kingdom, where it's fully a part of the National Health System, or even parts of Canada.People whose lives never had any hopes of getting better can finally just use the drug and keep on living, in a safe, clean space, with doctors, nurses, and information and help about quitting, including a buprenorphine or methadone treatment plan, which could even last forever, which isn't necessarily a bad thing.  The side effects that come from those drugs are so much less than some normal psycho-pharmaceuticals such as Lithium, and they also help prevent overdoses because almost every former user relapses at some point, and these maintenance drugs have a higher affinity to the opiate receptors, along with being literally bigger molecules that block the real heroin molecules from getting into the brain as easily, making a user of Subutex (buprenorphine brand name), for instance, much less likely to overdose if they did relapse, as they'd need to do much more than is normal for even the most hardcore junkie.These treatments (either real heroin, or maintenance drug such as Methadone), keep people from engaging in illegal markets, using in unclean areas, and stealing, etc... to fund their addictions.  Instead, they can even get a prescription once a month, or so, for their Methadone, take it every day (which isn't going to get someone high who isn't an ex-user who needs it), and go to work and live life just like everyone else, without anyone else needing to know.Ideally, being on one of these maintenance programs wouldn't even be something that one has to hide, as the more people are open about it, the more the general public will realize the efficacy.Not only is it safer for the user, making it easier for them to clean themselves up, but it's better for the general population.  This keeps civilians not involved at all from being stolen from to afford heroin, because health insurance can help cover the prescription costs, along with people using or buying drugs in public.  Taxes can be used for more positive programs, or even being cut, instead of arrests and prisons/jails, the general court system, etc...It's just such a "bad word" of an idea to even suggest that heroin addicts be treated like normal people, and be given a prescription that can literally completely fill their tolerance for opiates, preventing relapse, and kill any withdrawal symptoms, without having to actually get high, allowing ex-addicts to go back to normal lives more easily.The efficacy of straight up sobriety programs, such as AA or NA, or rehab programs that insist on cutting out any possibly narcotic medication (both anxiety and opiate maintenance) is highly questionable at best, with a proven record of only 5% max of people going into those programs actually sticking with it, which mostly involves "white knuckling" through withdrawal.It's great to see the topic coming up with politicians, finally, but they're still handling the issue with the prudence of the country that started the War on Drugs, refusing to admit they could possibly be losing the war, possibly worth just giving up.I just wish these politicians could really dive deep into these issues, without the famously prude American people going up in arms when they find out heroin users might be able to come back and live completely normal lives, alongside these "regular citizens."  It's incredible how closed the American people can be to new ideas in certain areas of policy.</comment>

<comment>The problem is that people aren't taking this stuff because they are trying to control physical pain, even if that was why it was prescribed in the first place.  They take it for pain, then realize that when they are taking the meds, they are better able to cope with their emotional problems and stress because they are numbed.  They aren't initially hooked by the addictive chemical processes of the drug, but by the mental relief the drug brings.  The epidemic here is not at its root one of drug use, but of depression.  And that's because our culture is sick, and producing sick people.  I mean, look at how many people are on antidepressants, or self-medicating one way or another.  That's supposed to be normal, or acceptable?It is an actual epidemic, a widespread mental health crisis.  But isn't going to be fixed.  Pharmaceuticals make the rich richer, as does any problem for which a corporation can sell you a supposed fix (medical industry, self-help industry, junk food to cheer you up, etc.).  And the problems that are leading people to depression are big, big moneymakers, especially income inequality, reduced actual pay versus a higher cost of living, and being treated more like serfs than people were a couple of decades ago.   It's more profitable to ignore mental health, or to profit directly from bad mental health.  Better that people have no time, no energy, and buy your processed crap and shove it in a microwave and chase it with an antidepressant, than treat people like valued human beings (as opposed to cogs in corporate workplace machinery).Anyway, the politicos will make a lot of noise, and probably come up with some kind of half-arsed plan that makes them look good and leaves many people without the help they really need.  It's like this noise about screening everyone for depression that they have been making lately, which is a joke when ... well, let's just say that what effing good does it do you to learn you are depressed when the treatment options for those without the fancy insurance doesn't offer squat to help.  If you're poor, at best, you get sent to a county clinic, where they just chuck pills at you -- the cheapest generic ones, with plenty of problematic side effects -- but don't do any talk therapy or properly monitor meds (which can kill you)l  And what are you going to do about it, if you are a poor serf, but just .... take more of those addictive pills studies have shown don't really work for most people anyway.The powers that be don't care if you're miserable, so long as you can be made to keep showing up for work and buying consumer goods, but it's a politician's job to put on a show.</comment>

<comment>The alarmist tone of this article, it's extremely light use of data, and its uncritical approach to the numbers it cites, leaves me mainly wondering how far from nothing this much ado is about.</comment>

<comment>Obama controls the opium fields in AfghanistanHe is the largest opium dealer in the world</comment>

<comment>His "control" of Afghanistan is not evident to most people. Perhaps you're using some special glasses.</comment>

<comment>It's great that 'addiction' is treated as a health issue, not a crime.  That is tremendous progress, thanks in large part to Obama's (and Holder's) leadership.  However, it is not a disease, nor is it the cause of the suicide epidemic.  The recent discovery about the high death rate of middle age white people shows that it's an issue of despair - and they are dying of all types of drugs and suicide and accidents and guns.  Many people who get a DUI are forced into AA 'treatment' which actually requires you to confess that you have a disease that will surely be your undoing unless you abstain completely, and this false belief is probably the largest factor in these deaths.  But if you actually attend a meeting you discover this important fact: overdoses are not "Oops I took one too many cuz I just wanted to get high".  It is more like "My boyfriend dumped me and I took every drug in the house."  This is what kills people - intentional suicide by polydrug overdose.  Pretending it's a 'disease' only makes the problem worse.  And the great majority of people who use heroin moderate over time - yes this is proven.Secondly there is a huge misconception about overprescription.  The problem is not people using their own drugs improperly.  The problem is people 'borrowing' or stealing those drugs and then they proceed to heroin: "They told me 'Don't do drugs' and I knew it was wrong but I stole my aunt's oxy and I was addicted almost immediately.  This drove me to use heroin and I had to steal stuff to get the money for it."Yes that's right: Addiction is an illness caused by thievery, and results in crime.  Either that or it's a religion of mischief.  Even so, it's better to 'treat' a religion as a health problem than a crime, so that at least is progress.  When we finally stop trying to 'help the still-suffering addict' then the problem will mostly evaporate.</comment>

<comment>More Liberal party lies.     Among other things, note thereference to opioid drugs as a gateway to heroin.  People were usingheroin before opioid drugs came along.  They aren't a gateway. Marijuana is the gateway.     And consider, among other things,like all Liberal [party deviates, “Governor” Andrew Cuomo isworking to promote, at taxpayer expense, the spread of heroinaddiction.  He has passed legislation providing, at taxpayer expense,special classes for heroin addicts on hos to recognize when anoverdose is coming on and how to handle it.  Those who pass will begiven free access to all the naloxone they want.  So characteristicof the depravity of the Liberal party.  Facilitating addiction byclaiming to be preventing overdoses!  Assisting people inperpetuating a filthy and malignant pastime, with the threat that,otherwise, you will be helping them kill themselves.     Fully equivalent to a kidnappersaying they will kill the individual unless they get so much money!     Extortion.     “Governor” Cuomo isaccommodating extortion!  At taxpayer expense!     More than that.     Liberal party “Mayor” ofIthaca, New York, Svante Myrick, wants to set up, at taxpayerexpense, a special clinic, staffed by taxpayer paid trained medicalstaff, for heroin addicts to shoot up in safely!     Face facts.     The Liberal party doesn't want toend drug addiction.     Remember, this is theadministration that armed the Mexican drug lords!</comment>

<comment>I guess doctors and health professionals who devote their lives to drug addiction are all liberal plants? Comparing opioids to marijuana was the first clue that you don't know what you're talking about. Opioids are physically addictive, marijuana is not.Providing life saving drugs to prevent overdose is not promoting anything, it's saving lives. Addicts are people too and they shouldn't die in the street because you have an outdated notion of drug treatment. And BTW the Bush Administration started Fast and Furious. It wasn't intended to arm drug lords, they were attempting to track the flow of weapons that come from the US.</comment>

<comment>A reply characteristic of thearrested development trash and freaks who support the Liberal party'slies and malignancies.     Where is SJLAW's proof that these“doctors” and “health professionals” really are “devotingtheir lives to drug addiction”?  They don't seem to be making anyheadway.  It looks more like they are devoted to causing the presenceof drug addiction to increase!     For that matter, where is SJLAW'sproof that “Operation Fast and Furious” wasn't intended to armthe drug lords?  Was SJLAW there when the plot was hatched?  SJLAW iscertainly lying when they say it started under George Bush. “Operation Fast and Furious” was started in late 2009, longenough time for Obama to have prevented it.     And the approach to the idea ofthe state undertaking responsibility for heroin addicts' gettingstoned is characteristic for depraved sociopaths.  Always putting theresponsibility on others for their compassion and consideration, butnever on themselves!  SJLAW condemns those who find fault in payingto perpetuate soul rotted losers' malignant habit, but never oncewould the ilk of SJLAW say that the addicts were in the wrong in thefirst place and are wrong to continue.  Face it,. Drugs are not an“epidemic”.  Heroin doesn't fly through the air biting unwarypeople.  An epidemic strikes those who don't have a great deal ofcontrol to stop it.  No one forces people to put heroin in theirbodies!  They did it themselves!  Because they worship their wantonwhims above all else!  They are all self absorbed narcissists and,yes, this is requiring the taxpayers to fund their selfish, selfabsorbed rottenness!  The thing is, the malignant know that thedecent wouldn't want anyone to die, and so they frame it in thatcontext.  “Either pay to provide me all the needs to make sure myshooting up is safe or I might die!  I certainly am never going to domy side of the deal and try to get off it!  You take care of me orI'll die!”  That is extortion!  Not surprising someone who wouldlie about Obama's involvement in arming the drug lords would try topromote something like!  Yes, the decent will likely capitulate,that's the way they are.  And the malignant will take and take andtake.  That's the way it is with the socio[paths all over the world,and that makes all heroin users sociopaths.  That's part of whatmakes them malignant.  And, yes, this is promoting heroin use.  Notsurprising the ilk of SJLAW, who would find fault in the decent fortheir not appreciating being robbed by the self absorbed sociopaths,would lie about that, too.</comment>

<comment>tl;dr</comment>

<comment>A characteristic response byLiberal party follower degenerates.     SJLAW had no intention ofdiscussing the issue directly from the start.  From the beginningtheir approach was contemptuous.  And illegitimate.  Among otherthings, George Bush did not start “Operation Fast and Furious”. A lie to try to make SJLAW's “point”.  And was SJLAW present when“Operation Fast and Furious” was planned to know its realintention?  And even if the chemicals in marijuana and heroin aredifferent, why not compare them?  And, frankly, you can lie thatmarijuana is not addictive, but how many recreational marijuana userscan go more than a couple of hours without another dose?  But SJLAWwon't address the points I made, because then they would have toadmit that they lied.  So they engage in another show of contempt, ofwholesale disrespect, a common tactic of Liberal party followerdeviates.  The Liberal party is nothing but a power mongeringswindle, appealing to groups the Liberal party leaders see as low andfoul and filthy.  Seeking votes for pretending to care about them andfunneling taxpayer money their way.</comment>

<comment>Marijuana is not a "gateway" to stronger drugs. Many people who smoke marijuana regularly stick with it and do not move on to stronger drugs.</comment>

<comment>Good, it's about time to have a real conversation about drug addiction/treatment without all the fear mongering BS. This will save a lot of lives.</comment>

<comment>The government is here to help you. Run! Is Obama going to secure the borders to stop drugs? No. Is he going to point more guns at citizens? Probably. This is the thing to watch for. Our establish types will never call for government action that brings troops and resource home to the border. Nope. Its always more troops far away and here at home a militarized police pointing weapons at citizens. </comment>

<comment>All this talk of rehab. Isn't it about time for some crackbaby style scarmongering from the lowlifes over at the DEA, or do they only enjoy locking up dark people?</comment>

<comment>"...nearly 30,000 Americans die each year' from prescription-painkiller and heroin abuse." This figure seems to think that deaths from opoids and deaths from heroin are identical. Sort of like lumping deaths by guns and deaths by drowning together.Heroin is already illegal, and that doesn't seemed to have solved the problem.How many people use guns to kill themselves every year? Using a gun to kill yourself is protected by the Constitution. Ironic.</comment>

