<comment>They're going to have even more to repair if Trump is elected. Their brand is badly tarnished, and he's not improving it in the least.</comment>

<comment>The credibility quotient in THAT room was the same as the media's numbers. Sorry, boys, we know what BOTH of you want and it has nothing to do with restoring America or representative gov't. You just want us to like you again. LOL!</comment>

<comment>I'll give Ryan credit for trying.  Particularly given that the extremes of his party will pull the discussion to places the mainstream party doesn't want to go.  This isn't new.  The ideologues are usually unhappy with the compromise that results from politics.  What is new is that the ideologues don't seem to feel like they should HAVE to compromise.  Ryan risks another spectacle of his Tea Party R's throwing a tantrum on C-span.  This is how we ended up with the last couple rounds of govt. shutdown, for those who are terrible at history.</comment>

<comment>More propaganda from the frantic liar which supports the regressive agenda.  That's why it loves and supports rinos.</comment>

<comment>I am utterly opposed to ayn rand's, er I mean paul ryan's vision for American governance, but I will give him credit for at least seeking to keep the conversation focused on questions of policy, rather than the mumbo jumbo nativist-speak of most republicans.  The fact that he did not shout out 'you lie' during the recent SOTU may be a low bar, but indicates he has potential to act like an adult.</comment>

<comment>This seems to be a long way of stating a common saying on the Hill: "The other party is the opposition, but the other House [of Congress] is the enemy."</comment>

<comment>I've been pleasantly surprised by Paul Ryan's speakership so far. But this, "And some House Republicans will inevitably complain if McConnell slow-walks bills they [the House] pass."The House has demonstrated that they will pass nothing more than Obamacare repeals (and occasional continuing resolutions when their backs are against the walls).  I hope Ryan proves me wrong, but I don't see Ryan ever passing any significant legislation on Health care, tax reform, or anti-poverty.</comment>

<comment>So here we finally see words used correctly : that "Leftism" exists and "Liberalism" is an idea from the right.</comment>

<comment>Come again?</comment>

<comment>Ryan and McConnell try to keep the peace. Good luck with that. Paul Ryan came into the speakership role thinking he was going to be the savoir of the party. Wrong. His party is out of control and if he thinks they will listen to him he has another think coming. The young gun is out of his league with that motley crew. We will see as time goes on how effective his role is. I think he will be sorry that he took that role on he will find it's like herding sheep trying to get things done as they don't like the word compromise anymore than John Boehner did.</comment>

<comment>“We like to think of the House and the Senate at this time as really being the think tank for conservative policy.”Since trickle-down economics, the Laffer Curve,  more tax cuts for the wealthy combined with savage cuts for Social Security,  Medicare and the ACA have gone to a special place under Obama,  the "think tank" now resides atop the last toilet on the left in the Senate Men's Room. </comment>

<comment>I'm sure I will hate all of Ryan's plans , but I would not mind going back to the days when conservatives had ideas that were constructive and furthered the conversation and made it possible to achieve compromise.  </comment>

<comment>THIS "KEEP THE PEACE" VOTE NOT REPORTED BY MAINSTREAM MEDIA.RNC Member Committee Stands Firm to ...Protect Obama...That is very unusual!RNC SCUTTLES IMPEACHMENT IN COMMITTEE VOTEBy J.B. Williams | January 16, 2016http://newswithviews.com/JBWil...At the opening of the January Republican National Committee meeting in Charleston South Carolina Wednesday, the RNC Resolutions Committee was forced to vote on a RNC Resolutionknown as the Agema Resolution, supporting the proper Impeachment of Barack Hussein Obama for his many crimes of treason, tyranny and treachery against the United States and the people.The nine member Resolutions Committee chaired by Carolyn McLarty of Oklahoma, voted unanimously to kill the Agema Resolution in committee, preventing the full body of the RNC from ever having a vote or voice on the measure in the full meeting scheduled for Friday January 15.Not one member of the RNC Resolutions Committee supported the Agema Resolution to impeach what is admittedly the most impeachable administration in U.S. history. Not even known acts of treason and tyranny by the Obama Administration, not the Iran deal, or even Obama’s recent unilateral gun grab EO (Executive Order) just a week ago, was enough to cause the leadership of the Republican Party to support a resolution on impeachment.The nine members of the RNC Resolutions Committee who blocked the measure from the full body are as follows…Carolyn McLarty (Oklahoma) ChairMelody Potter (West Virginia)Paul Reynolds (Alabama)Tamara Scott (Iowa)Steve Scheffler (Iowa)Pat Longo (Connecticut)John Frey (Connecticut)Rosie Tripp (New Mexico)Linda Acherman (California)Republicans were given the purse strings in 2010 and have not “defunded” anything since, not even Planned Parenthood. From 2009 through 2014, the Republican excuse for not impeaching Obama was “we don’t control the Senate” and “we will impeach if we get control of the Senate,” which the people gave them control of a year ago in the 2014 election cycle.Since 2014, the Republican excuse for not impeaching has been, “there is no public outcry for impeachment,” which is true, because Republicans had taken “impeachment off the table” under Boehner and McConnell, and clearly, it remains “off the table” under Paul Ryan, and certainly Priebus.</comment>

<comment>The U.S. government is mostly run by just five people: Barack Obama, Mitch McConnell, Harry Reid, Paul Ryan, and Nancy Pelosi.This past month, these five pushed through a horrible Omnibus spending bill to fund the government through next September.The bill amounts to a betrayal of American voters, especially on immigration matters.Where do I begin to condemn this? I'll start with GOP House Speaker Paul Ryan.It didn't take long for Ryan to break all his promises on immigration, did it?When he was running for Speaker two months ago, Ryan promised he would not bring up immigration bills that did not have the backing of a majority of Republican House Members.Yet as soon as he got the chance, Ryan snuck several huge immigration giveaways into the Omnibus spending bill Congress approved.It goes further:»Nearly QUADRUPLES the number of H-2B low-skilled foreign workers allowed in this year. This could raise the total of these workers this year from 66,000 to 264,000.Not only that...»FUNDS a large increase in Syrian and other refugee resettlement in this country. Instead of a timeout and a full security review, Congress handed Obama everything he wants.»FUNDS Obama's catch-and-release policy that virtually stops deportations.»FUNDS Sanctuary Cities, so that cities like San Francisco that refuse to turn over jailed illegal aliens to the feds will face no cut in funding.»MAINTAINS tax credits to illegal aliens in the form of the Earned Income Tax Credit. That is, if a family is poor enough, they not only pay no income tax, the government pays THEM. Yes, that includes illegal aliens! Also, Congress continues to allow illegal aliens to claim child tax credits on their tax returns.»FUNDS the continued relocation into America of the unaccompanied minors who are marching across the border into Texas and states. The numbers of these crossing the border is way up again this year.Even with all these outrages I've mentioned, there are still MORE terrible things hidden in the Omnibus bill, which passed both the House and the Senate. A hopeful sign is that 95 House Republicans joined with 18 House Democrats, and 26 Senate Republicans joined with 6 Senate Democrats to vote NO on this monstrosity.Yet, most Republicans and most all the Democrats voted yes, and it passed. Their complicity in this sell out is the real threat to Americans,Watch, if you dare as Senator Jeff Sessions explains it best:Why American Voters Are "in Open Rebellion!"youtu.be/PBqrWL3h9-g</comment>

<comment>Tl;dr</comment>

<comment>@r*t</comment>

<comment>...KEEP THE PEACE??I hope Americans clearly understand what Republican RINO donor policies are all about now. Mitch McConnel, John Boehner, Paul Ryan and Eric Cantor and have championed Obama's treasonous agenda for almost a decade!Before the November 2014 election, Republican's made us, their base, sweet sounding promises! Then they lied, betrayed and back stabbed their supporters after the election.The November 2014 election was ..NOT, approval for Republican to recently pass the Omnibus Spending Bill and F#%k over all Americans opposed to funding illegal aliens and muslim refugee resettlement.The November 2014 election was ..NOT, approval for Republican plans to pass TPP and F#%k over American workers.The November election was a verdict ..AGAINST, Obama's treasonous illegal alien amnesty plans ....by ....the .....American ....voters!The election was ..NOT, approval for Republican plans to pass a funding bill that pays for Obama's illegal executive action granting legal status to illegal aliens.The election was ..NOT, approval for Republican plans to do the same thing as disclosed in Gang Of Eight Senate Bill 744 and recently passed CRONYbus HR83.The last election was ..NOT, approval for Republican plans to NOT round up and deport ALL illegal aliens in the USA.The election was ..NOT, approval for Republican plans to increase H-1b visas as disclosed in Gang Of Eight Senate Bill 744.The election was ...NOT, approval for Republican plans to NOT cancel the H-1b visa program and NOT deport ALL the foreigners here now taking American jobs.The election was ..NOT, approval for Republican actions to gut EPA regulations and pollute with abandon.The election was ..NOT, approval for Republican plans to drill in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR).The election was ..NOT, approval for Republicans to allow corporations to avoid paying US taxes through tax inversion schemes.The election was ..NOT, approval for ALL Republicans to allow US Banks to once again allow "Derivatives provision" and CITIBANK language repealing part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform law putting American taxpayers on the hook, ...again, for their losses as recently passed in CRONYbus HR83.Remember, American Patriots STILL, vote in far greater numbers than Illegal Aliens and Billionaire PAC'$ ...and they will vote for TRUMP!Oh, and speaking of ...establishment republicans and illegal aliens. I was glad to see that Eric Cantor was up and around tearfully p|mping John Boehner's career. Last I heard, he had his head over a toilet for 6 months after his loss.</comment>

<comment>Don't hold your breath waiting on the "conservative replacement for Obamacare" as it's not coming. The GOP is not interested in helping people get insurance, only lining the pockets of Big Pharma, insurers and providers.</comment>

<comment>Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell Try to Keep the Peace http://disq.us/95grwk they sleep with the fishes</comment>

