<comment>This is a movie about organized crime, featuring the Catholic church, the largest organized child rape crime syndicate in the history of the US, and in BRUTAL defiance of Jesus in Matt 18:6-14.The Catholic church is an organized crime syndicate worse than Whitey Bulger's from Black Mass.Whitey Bulger killed 20 adults.  The creepy pedo-priests in the Catholic church raped over 1,000 children in Boston alone, thanks to 220+ pedophile priests hidden and protected by hundreds of other priests, including Cardinal Law.  The Catholic church admitted 4,329 substantiated, accused pedophile priests in the US in their own John Jay report of 2004, and of course they lied.  The number is well over 6,900.And the Catholic church hid & protected 100% of their known pedo-priests, worldwide (Matt 18:6-14).</comment>

<comment>Some hide behind religion to do all sorts. Some profess to be Christians but their actions and words are far removed from what a real Christian would do or say. Priests are a prime example of someone who wears a 'uniform' to get away with things as those who wear a uniform are usually looked upon as good decent citizens. We know that not to be true. In my opinion a uniform can hide a multitude of sin.</comment>

<comment>"Months earlier, the Pope approved a tribunal to hear cases of bishops accused of covering up sexual abuse by priests."And therefore he and the Church clearly still don't get it.  When the Church has evidence of a civil crime commited by a member of the clergy, their responsibility is to turn that evidence over to civil authority, not deal with it in-house, by however fearsome a "tribunal".  The desire to deal with dirty laundry out of public view is precisely the reason for this revolting multi-decade mess.The hierarchy is still having trouble absorbing a simple thought: it is not their place to dispense private justice to their own.  That's not how their compact with civil society works. There will be more embarrassments until they internalize this.</comment>

<comment>Famously Henry II and Thomas Becket passionately disagreed over how to handle crimes among clergymen. Thus the Constitution at Clarendon. Bringing civil and criminal charges against the church, versus the church trying to handle it internally or even cover it up, is as old as the Catholic church itself.</comment>

<comment>Molly Ball recently published an essay on this site proclaiming that Liberals are losing the cultural war. I disagree with her thesis. As a fairly large point of proof that Liberals are in fact winning decisively over Conservatives I give you the decline of religion in America (and Europe as well.) A large part of that decline has been the weakening of the Catholic church due to the scandals concerning the abuse of children and the revelations of what is really going on in that institution. In past times and places such breaking news would never have been made public. In Liberal America it did and is causing a big downfall. As Mr. Merritt points out this is going far beyond the Catholic church to virtually all others and beyond America's borders.</comment>

