Headline::::
The truth behind China's exchange rate delusion




DateTime::::2016-02-18T13:24:52+0000



<p><span class="drop-cap"><span class="drop-cap__inner">C</span></span>hina’s management of its exchange rate peg continues to rattle global financial markets. Uncertainty about renminbi devaluation is fuelling fears that deflationary forces will <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" draggable="true" href="http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/chinese-growth-slowdown-global-economic-t">sweep through emerging markets</a> and deliver a blow to developed economies, where interest rates are at, or near, zero and thus cannot be lowered to defend against imported deflation. Fiscal gridlock in Europe and the US is heightening the angst.</p>

<p>But the current bout of exchange rate anxiety is really just a symptom of the fact that China’s transition from an export-led growth strategy to one propelled by domestic consumption is proceeding far less smoothly than hoped. For some people, visions of the wonders of capitalism with Chinese characteristics remain undiminished. They are certain that, after more than three decades of state-directed growth, China’s leaders know what to do to turn their slumping economy around.</p>

<p>The optimists’ unreality is rivalled by that of supply-siders, who would apply shock therapy to China’s slumping state sector and immediately integrate the country’s underdeveloped capital markets into today’s turbulent global financial system. That is a profoundly dangerous prescription. The power of the market to transform China will not be unleashed in a stagnant economy, where such measures would aggravate deflationary forces and produce a calamity.</p>

<p>The persistent downward pressure on the renminbi reflects a growing fear that Chinese policymakers have no coherent solution to the dilemmas they face. Floating the renminbi, for example, is a dangerous option. After all, with the <a class="u-underline" data-component="auto-linked-tag" data-link-name="auto-linked-tag" href="http://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy">Chinese economy</a> undergoing wholesale economic transformation, estimating a long-term equilibrium exchange rate that will anchor speculation is virtually impossible, particularly given persistent doubts about data quality, disclosure, and opaque policymaking processes.</p>

<p>But if the current exchange-rate peg to a basket of currencies fails to anchor the renminbi and prevent sharp depreciation, the deflationary consequences for the world economy will be profound. Moreover, they will feed back on the Chinese export sector, thus dampening the stimulative impact of a weakened currency.</p>

<p>The key to stabilising the exchange rate lies in creating a credible development policy. Only then will the pressure on the renminbi, and on China’s foreign-exchange reserves, subside, because investors will see a clear way forward.</p>

<p>Establishing policy credibility will require diminishing the muddled microeconomic incentives of state control and guarantees. It will also require reinvigorating aggregate demand by targeting fiscal policy to support the emerging economic sectors that will underpin the new growth model.</p>

<p>But, as usual with China, such a strategy is riddled with contradictions. For example, reducing the size of the state-enterprise sector is necessary, yet would be certain to depress aggregate demand at a time when demand is already soft. Likewise, cutting fiscal support (via government-directed bank lending) to zombie firms would free up fiscal capacity and enable resources to be redirected to new sectors that facilitate services and urban employment; but this would exacerbate – at least at first – the current demand shortfall.</p>

<p>Slashing the state sector abruptly and expecting to achieve transformation through austerity is not the way forward. Economic historians, notably Michael Bernstein in his<a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/%22http:/"> study</a> of the great depression in the US, have convincingly shown that an economy in transition requires strong aggregate demand to pull resources into new sectors. If both the old and new sectors of an economy are in a slump, capital formation will sputter, investment in upgrading human capital will decline, and structural adjustment will stall. Robust aggregate demand is always essential to successful transformation.</p>

<p>An equally large obstacle to China’s economic transition – the problem that almost dare not speak its name – is the widespread worship of China’s hybrid market economy. Simply put, current muddled market incentives impede transformation by favouring state-owned enterprises.</p>

<p>In early 2012, when the Chinese leadership moved toward stronger private ownership, stocks in the private-sector sub-index outperformed the state-owned sector sub-index on both the Shanghai and Hong Kong stock exchanges. But since the spring of 2014, this trend has reversed, and the state-owned sector sub-index has outperformed the private-sector sub-index. As the Chinese economy slows and default risk grows, the value of state guarantees rises, directing capital away from private-sector growth.</p>

<p>This hybrid system clearly impedes credit allocation from catalysing development while creating and sustaining vested interests opposed to change. This holding pattern is particularly harmful because profound transformation will surely depend on financing from a sound sovereign bond market, which cannot function properly until uncertainty related to the government’s contingent liabilities – all those implicit guarantees – has been resolved.</p>

<p>China has it within its power to stabilise its exchange rate via <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-economi">credible reforms</a>, particularly policies that redirect resources to invigorate domestic demand and pull resources toward the newer high-value sectors. The overhaul China needs cannot be accomplished in a slump, or by a large exchange-rate depreciation that deflates the world in a vain effort to turn back the clock to an era of export-led growth that stagnant demand in the west has rendered nonviable.</p>

<p><strong>Copyright: <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="http://www.project-syndicate.org/">Project Syndicate</a>, 2015.</strong></p>




Author::::Alex Wijaya
DateTime::::2016-02-20T13:10:23Z
only idiot who expect China to have smooth economic transition. The Chinese leaders knew this won't be easy and thus the changing policy according to the situation. China is in a much better position than the west, its economy is still growing, and its unemployment rate is still low, not to mention the Chinese people are consuming more than ever, the kind of thing the Chinese gov wanted in the first place. The only problem is the stock market, which is understandable because it has been swinging like crazy due to the speculation. Factories are closing due to overcapacity, but the workers were absorbed into the new consumption based economy. Capital flight? that is China dumping dollars, worthless toilet paper.



Author::::TheEqlaowaizer
DateTime::::2016-02-20T04:00:37Z
The chinese DO know what's going on, well some of them and they are the ones taking the money and getting out. Then there's the sawathe that know what's happening but are unable to face the fact they've been had, mainly due to the CCP forcing down their throats that China is the people and the people are the party. watch this. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s8oaUepvc70



Author::::TheEqlaowaizer
DateTime::::2016-02-20T03:57:02Z
It was obviously a cult.



Author::::GreatGrandDad
DateTime::::2016-02-19T20:30:18Z
...your deposit ... is no longer your money but just another bank liability.



Author::::kimdriver
DateTime::::2016-02-19T16:33:19Z
An ex-banker, who knows his onions.



Author::::HappyValley
DateTime::::2016-02-19T05:11:32Z
Whataboutery



Author::::CitizenWise
DateTime::::2016-02-18T22:49:26Z
There are lots of 'current' reasons, though the main one being if you go to war you don’t have to pay anyone anything, especially if you win.



Author::::seamuspadraig
DateTime::::2016-02-18T22:36:58Z
Whether there's a formal peg or not doesn't really matter. If all your customers/competitors are slashing their currencies, then you have to do likewise so as not to get priced out of the market.



Author::::Gelion
DateTime::::2016-02-18T22:26:17Z
Yep, the City is full of dirty Russian money too.



Author::::idrinkbeer
DateTime::::2016-02-18T22:20:51Z
Those sound like the words of a banker



Author::::Robert Carter
DateTime::::2016-02-18T22:05:53Z
I am sure that monsoon believes that everything will end in vivid rainbows, because big brother Xi will make sure his children are taken care of. Chinese belief in faceless bureaucrats and a closed and unknown system of "Chinese style" capitalism astounds me. Xi and his buddies are blowing it down the drain and yet - what is it Chinese wumao and others like monsoon want and espouse? A happy ending to this bedtime story where everything ends well, and all is cream and chocolate and delicious candies? This is the real world - oh dear. You may actually have to read real journalistic articles that deal with what facts are known instead of the picture the communist party chooses to paint based on baseless information - and lack of freedom of the press - oh dear. Lets start with China growing at 6.9%... extremely unlike to the point of delirious. 3% if China is lucky - but Xi and friends keep putting out that 6.9% as every other fact dug up by journalists and economists outside of China says otherwise. I would say that your bedtime fairy tale in China is turning into a horrible nightmare.



Author::::jonathanvause
DateTime::::2016-02-18T21:10:36Z
... why/how, exactly?



Author::::michael panero
DateTime::::2016-02-18T20:37:27Z
A gold egg laying goose is born, the owner starts to smoke cigars, buys big cars and loose women.One day the bird gets Ill , what do you feed such a bird? Call the vet! who suggest the kindest thing is to rip it's head off.Everyone is point at each other and shouting, the wind blows thru the dilapidated house, children go hungry in old cloths and we await the arrival of another metal laying avian.



Author::::CitizenWise
DateTime::::2016-02-18T19:54:51Z
This unfolding scenario sort of reminds me of Germany’s boom in the 1930’s and what happened to Poland after an ‘incident’ occurred in 1939.



Author::::SiberianNights
DateTime::::2016-02-18T18:50:05Z
Last summer there was good item about financial news from China on the BBC Radio 4 programme about statistics called 'More or Less'.I'll never find the link, but the message seemed to be that the financial news from China we received last year was unnecessarily alarmist and misleading, not because the Chinese were misreading their own situation, but because the figures were being converted to the incongruous western context. The Chinese capital markets were being described as if they functioned like western ones, where everything is genuinely at stake. In China, however, many of the speculators are effectively 'just pretending' and are paid to do so by the government. Huge amounts of capital cannot be lost in the same kind of way in China.



Author::::An 1
DateTime::::2016-02-18T18:28:02Z
Economics is not an exact science, but an economy which relies to heavily on asset growth and property appreciation and speculation will experience difficulties. 



Author::::KarlBC
DateTime::::2016-02-18T17:18:29Z
The issue with China is also their strength, the shear size of the population. Despite having the latest and best automated production lines in many industries. They were still keeping those since 1960s! Just to keep people working?! 



Author::::Texden
DateTime::::2016-02-18T17:10:17Z
Food for thought. What's your view of the situation?



Author::::DrThomasCopper
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:42:48Z
Agreed, it is the job of Government to break monopolies and create the most efficient price discovery mechanism possible, the problem is that they've been bought by the fiat banking interests and big business, corrupted by cronyism, and have failed in their duty of care to free market capitalism.



Author::::John Tullly
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:39:09Z
Unlike London,eh,Gelion?



Author::::John Tullly
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:37:01Z
Unlike,of course,the USA that slaughtered the indigenous population of North America.moved on to great slaughter of the Civil War,and then around the entire world murdering many millions of innocents, in their ambition to achieve world hegemony.Lessons to be learnt?



Author::::John Tullly
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:32:06Z
Che,almost a word perfect description of the the United States of America,even the detail of the fouly polluted environment.



Author::::Nietzschescat
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:25:06Z
Indeed - in fact one Adam Smith pointed this out.



Author::::MegaMugs
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:17:49Z
China being a one party state has a better chance of navigating financial challenges long as there is a decent amount of brains at the helm. We use western capitalist gridlock (hung parliaments, weak central banks etc) to interpret China. The problem seems to be western leaders are all talk but lack very little will to lead with confidence when things get tough. Preference is to do the wrong thing by trying to make it easy for everyone but continuing the dysfunctional economics.



Author::::kimdriver
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:13:50Z
Just the excuse the banks need to provoke another financial collapse and use it to steal account holders' money through the latest legalised mugging technique known as the bail-in.



Author::::Gelion
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:10:56Z
I always said the Christianity was a dangerous religion, and how right I was with Jesus' brother at the forefront of it all. 



Author::::Gelion
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:08:27Z
China had pegged the renminbi to the dollar, artificially so, since the 1990s so really they are at fault for this and not the West for printing QE since 2008.



Author::::kimdriver
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:08:10Z
Nice to see a balanced article for once. But China does have a dilemma. The yuan is, after years of relatively high domestic inflation, seriously overvalued in real terms. Although that might help the migration to a domestically-based consumption economy, they can't throw the old economy under a bus and expect a new one to emerge overnight.



Author::::Gelion
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:06:10Z
Every market in history has been rigged in some way or other, to think otherwise is naive. 



Author::::Gelion
DateTime::::2016-02-18T16:05:13Z
Anti EU this, anti EU that - but in reality Russian mafia money was all over Cyprus. 



Author::::monsooon
DateTime::::2016-02-18T15:58:31Z
Oh dear, another article in the same vein as all the other western-thinking based ones. When, when, when, are we going to be able to read something, not from the predictable western view, but from the Chinese - or even asian - perspective. It gets very tedious to read the samestuff al the time. And not helpful either.



Author::::Nietzschescat
DateTime::::2016-02-18T15:42:15Z
"Central planning and rigged markets" - you do realise that the Fed & the ECB have been running the markets - fixed income & equity since at least 2008? ANd who has benefited?



Author::::cheveguara
DateTime::::2016-02-18T15:18:37Z
The Chinese Regime could not organise a piss up in a brewery let alone run a country properly. All they are in it for is to skim off as much as they can for their own Swiss bank accounts and those of their fellow Communist party members. There never has been any strategy for developing the country in a sure and sound way, they are completely devoid of ideas. The place has become a pollution nightmare, a health catastrophe, with fewer and more poisoned water resources than ever. It's like the titan arum, it's grown far too quickly and now it's starting to stink, finally leaving a nasty mess behind which no -one can clean up.



Author::::chalkandcheese
DateTime::::2016-02-18T15:12:42Z
I'll go to all of the banks where I have more than 100,000 euros and withdraw my money, then I'll wake up.



Author::::MSR Seshu
DateTime::::2016-02-18T15:05:45Z
The emergence of the Chinese on the international economic scene has been a miracle of sorts. Richard Nixon's ping-pong diplomacy in the 1970s gradually pitch forked China into the big league of international economy what with the US and the other ' developed ' and industrialised countries lifting the trade and tariff barriers, first to cajole a ' suspect ' world power behind the bamboo curtain, and later to benefit from its vast economic potential. While the going has been good for so long as it lasted, the world, especially the western, economies have been suck into being ' client ' economies of China. Fewer economies are now out of the Chinese economic influence , with its currency linked to the international basket of currencies. I am reminded of the period when the petro-dollars had a kind of vice grip over the world's currency markets. The present situation is no different, the only difference being that China will do what it wants to do and does not need others to tell it what it must do.



Author::::MattSpanner
DateTime::::2016-02-18T14:58:23Z
Indeed. Remember what happened to Laiki Bank in Cyprus in 2013? Accounts with balances of more than 100,000 euros were "top-sliced" by 40% and converted to worthless Laiki shares. The reason given by the EU's 'Troika' was that anyone with that much money must be a Russian money-launderer. So if you hear the words 'EU' and 'bail-in' go straight to the bank and withdraw you money.



Author::::MattSpanner
DateTime::::2016-02-18T14:39:32Z
China does change, but usually chaotically, and the result of the chaos is always another dictatorship. A glance at China's history will reveal more than a hundred major revolutions and revolts. We hear about the big ones like the Boxer Rebellion and Communist Revolution but others are less well-known, such as the Taiping rebellion. The Taiping Rebellion was led by Hong Xiaquan. He claimed to be Jesus's brother. He was accompanied in his campaigns by a bevy of silk-clad maidens. He slaughtered the inhabitants of every town and village he conquered on the way to Beijing, and was only stopped at the last moment by General "Chinese" Gordon, an Englishman commanding Chinese Imperial Troops. The death toll is thought to be in excess of 20 million. More recently Mao Zedong caused the death of 40 million in his "Great Leap Forward". So let's hope that when China does change, it won't follow precedent.



Author::::seamuspadraig
DateTime::::2016-02-18T14:35:15Z
In criticizing China for slashing the renminbi, the author fails to note that all the other countries have been engaged in endless amounts of ZIRP/QE for years. The People's Bank of China cannot just sit still while the Bank of Japan, the Fed and ECB are all debasing their own currencies.



Author::::DrThomasCopper
DateTime::::2016-02-18T14:33:21Z
Central planning and rigged markets do not work in anything other than the shortest of timeframes. Unsound, unlimited fiat money has already caused at least one Chinese downfall and we are being driven down the same road at dangerous speeds.



Author::::idrinkbeer
DateTime::::2016-02-18T14:33:18Z
Just the excuse the banks need to provoke another financial collapse and use it to steal account holders' money through the latest legalised mugging technique known as the bail-inhttp://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/LSU/?uri=celex:32014L0059



