4 March 2016

DURING A condolence meeting organised by the Sangh Parivar on Sunday for Arun Mahaur, a Dalit VHP worker allegedly killed by Muslim youths in Agra on February 25, BJP’s Fatehpur Sikri MP Babu Lal urged the crowd to “fix a date” and “take on Muslims”.Babu Lal, who sought to rally the Dalit community with his speech, is also a prime accused in one of the worst cases of violence against Dalits in Uttar Pradesh.According to police records and eyewitness accounts, in June 1990, Lal allegedly mobilised Jats to prevent a Dalit wedding procession from crossing his home in the Jat-dominated locality of Agra’s Panwari village. The village had 87 Dalit families, but all of them, barring one, were forcibly evicted by the Jats, allegedly under the leadership of Lal, who was at the time the Block President of Achhnera and was emerging as a prominent Jat leader.Bharat Singh Kardam, whose younger sister Mundra was supposed to get married on June 21, 1990, vividly remembers the incident. “Babu Lal has concern for Dalits? He was the prime accused in the Panwari riots. He instigated people, saying a wedding procession of Dalits must not cross the Jat colony, that it would be a humiliation. We had decided to change the route but he wanted to further his political career through these riots,” Kardam claimed.Despite heavy security, Jats managed to attack the wedding procession, leading to riots in the area. Dalit homes were burnt down in Panwari as violence spread across Agra and adjoining districts. Several people died in the riots, and Agra remained under curfew for several days.Babu Lal was unavailable for comments. His personal assistant said he is unwell.Kardam alleged that “armed Jats had surrounded the wedding procession”. “We were scared. Somehow, we managed to run away, leaving everything behind,” he said.Kardam, who is fighting the case in Agra’s SC/ST court on behalf of the affected families, has with him thick files containing newspaper clippings and photographs showing burnt down homes and a deserted Panwari village. One photograph, of two big vessels, is captioned: “Vegetable curry that was prepared for the wedding guests”. Another is of “a dead buffalo in Jatav colony”.Rambai Sonkar, a member of the Schedule Caste, died in the violence, reportedly while trying to pacify the Jats. His body was never recovered. Kardam had deposed in the court that Babu Lal and his men committed the murder.After the riots, former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi visited Panwari, but the Dalits still felt it safer to flee and settle in neighbouring villages. Most of them work as daily labourers today. “The Jats burnt down our homes. Everything was done at the behest of Babu Lal,” claimed Mange Lal, who now stays in Mahal village, a few kilometres away. He claimed that even as they fled, members of their community were “pulled out of buses and assaulted”.While the administration had promised homes and compensation for the affected Dalits, Kardam said none of them have their own homes till date.Babu Lal, who bragged on Sunday that he has faced the National Security Act on three occasions, was also convicted and given life term in 1984 for the murder of one Vijendra Singh. The high court stayed the sentence and he was released on appeal. He had also been booked under the NSA for allegedly assaulting a polling officer at a booth during an assembly election in Fatehpur Sikri in 1993.All five accused in Mahaur’s murder have been arrested. Police claim Mahaur and the main accused, Shahrukh, had an altercation a day before he was killed.

