26 February 2016

MANCHESTER, England (AP) — With British fighters holding 13 versions of world titles, two of those champions face off on Saturday in a matchup that has been in the making for years.Scott Quigg and Carl Frampton, unbeaten boxers holding the WBA and IBF belts, respectively, fight in Manchester to unify the super-bantamweight titles. It's only the third all-British unification fight in the last 23 years."For me, there could be no titles on the line," Quigg said, "because it has been built up into such a rivalry between us."And it's been getting personal ahead of the fight, with Frampton accusing his rival of "having a lack of intelligence outside of the ring (that) reflects on how he fights inside the ring."Quigg left school at the age of 14 and lives at home with his parents. Now 27, he still gets his food cooked for him every day."He hasn't lived a life for the last 10 years," his father, Kenny, told the BBC. "He's like a monk."Quigg, though, isn't to be underestimated in the ring, especially since his second-round win against the respected Kiko Martinez last July. It was the sixth time he'd retained the title and pushed his record to 31 wins and two draws from 33 fights. Born near Mannchester, Quigg will have home advantage.Frampton, from Northern Ireland, has won all 21 of his fights and has been mentored all his career by Barry McGuigan — a former world featherweight champion and one of Britain's greatest boxers."He can really fire you up," the 29-year-old Frampton said of McGuigan. "He's someone who has been there and done it, he has been involved in some of the biggest nights in British boxing."The fight is tough to call for the experts. Frampton's struggle to beat Alejandro Gonzalez Jr. in July — Frampton was knocked down twice in the first round and only won on points — has evened it up further.The pair clashed on Thursday in their final news conference, with a dispute breaking out over who has the "home" dressing room for the fight.Quigg believes he should have it because he is the "home fighter" but Frampton says his opponent's stance is purely down to superstition. To force home the point, Frampton played Stevie Wonder's "Superstition" from his cell phone during the end of the news conference.The fighters pushed and shoved as they faced off."The way I have lived since I dropped out of school, I have dedicated my life to this sport," Quigg said. "This means everything to me. This is my moment of destiny and, believe me, I will win this fight."

