2 February 2016

bbmedia.bakarbaaz.comKhardung La is at a towering elevation of 18,379 feet above sea-level (5602 m) and is the gateway to the Shyok and Nubra valleys in Ladakh. The road from Leh to Khardung La is asphalted for 24 km. The road is made up of gravel and muddy trail till the North Pullu check point.HolidayIQ Traveller Vineet Tomar says, “Leh is the place, which provides everything for a visit. It is very calm and peaceful and the surroundings and environment are so soothing. Riding through Leh is a wonderful experience. The sangam near Leh is a wonderful location to visit. Pangong Lake and the way to the Pangong is awesome, without which the journey is incomplete. And finally, the Khardung La Pass - the highest motorable road, which is amazing too.”This is a high mountain pass at an elevation of 10,800 ft above the sea level. If you plan to drive on this route, make sure you get your vehicle well-prepared. This road is the first Indian pass to open every year and is driveable by all vehicles. The roads are closed in the pear winter months of December, January and February.HolidayIQ Traveller Udit Bhardwaj shares, “I've visited Jalori Pass in the month of June. It was a breathtaking journey from Aut Tunnel to Jalori Pass. Road is good till Banjar distt but after that you need to be a good driver to control your car otherwise you'll loose the control. During visit you need to carry some eatables with you as there is not much shops available on the site.”Nathula is located around 56 kms from Gangtok at an altitude of 14450 ft and the road passes through the Tsomgo lake. It is one of the highest motorable mountain passes and is surrounded by rich alpine flora. Nathula is open for Indian nationals on Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sundays.HolidayIQ Traveller Seema Kale shares, “It was an amazing experience. The winding and treacherous roads was an adventure in itself. Due to continuous land slides be prepared for a roller coaster ride. On the way to Nathu La, we can stop at changu lake and take jackets and gumboots on rent. There is also a small market at changu where one can purchase jackets and winter wear which is from China.”Riding through these hairpin bends is an exhilarating experience. This route is dangerous but yet thrilling and makes for an ideal ride from Bangalore.HolidayIQ Traveller Suresh AS shares, “Kolli hills is the nice place to have a short trip( 2 days). There are lot of sightseeing places. It has 72 hairpin bends I think. The government is developing the kolli hills as one the best tourist place in tamilnadu. the people of kolli hills are nice and they respecting good. There are lot resorts placed in kolli hills but the best resort is Nallathambi Resort.”It’s one of the most dangerous and exciting roads of the world. This is definitely not for the faint-hearted. Your vehicle and your stamina are truly going to be tested because the road abounds in twists and turns with wheels sometimes hanging above the precipice. The road starts in Keylong at an elevation of 3,080 m (10,100 ft) above the sea level and ends in Kishtwar, a town at an elevation of 1,638 m (5,374 ft) above the sea level.HolidayIQ Traveller from Delhi shares, “On one’s own, one should preferably travel in an SUV or any 4X4 vehicle as the terrain is very rough and avoid traveling in a small car like Alto as we did. But to our surprise most of the four wheelers we found in Keylong were either Maruti 800 or Omni (Van). The driver should be an experienced hand in driving on such hilly terrain.”Within a drive of 16 kms from Zuluk you will climb close to 3000 feet. The steep roads here is commonly referred to as the zig-zag road.  Get your adrenaline pumping on this exciting road trip! There could be no better ending to the year than driving on the Zuluk Loops. The road through Zuluk makes almost 32 hairpin turns to reach Lungthung, which makes it a unique engineering feat.HolidayIQ Traveller Avijit Maji says, “An excellent drive! The lovely Zuluk Loops, Gnathang Valley, Padamchen, Kupup Memencho Lake and the Silk Route bends.”The road to Munnar is sharply winding, steep and also has narrow zigzags. The road is scenic but it can be dangerous too.  In the Adimali - Neriamangalam road there are no Street Lights, and the road can be covered with Fog, which will completely blind your vision and more over there can be wild elephants.Rohtang Pass is a high mountain pass at an elevation of 3,979 m above the sea level. This route is closed half a year and each season road crews use GPS to find the road and dig it out again. This place is prone to landslides cgiving the pass its name, which translates to ground of corpses.HolidayIQ Traveller Sumith shares, “It is located at a height of 13500 feet above sea level. As you reach on Rohtang Pass, you will discover the snow everywhere as temperature dips drastically after 2pm. It gets closed in November due to snowfall. Must visit place where one can see the Himalayan View with snow covered peaks all around.”

