4 March 2016

WHILE MOUNTING an attack on the Congress, Prime Minister Narendra Modi Thursday quoted former Lok Sabha Speaker Somnath Chatterjee’s remarks of 2004, when he had berated the frequent disruptions of Parliament. Chatterjee, meanwhile, seemed amused that the PM has quoted him and subtly conveyed that Modi was at the “receiving end”.Chatterjee, LS Speaker between 2004 and 2009, often spoke — both inside and outside Parliament — against disruptions of the House and at times even reprimanded errant MPs, earning him even the nickname “headmaster”. His pain over the frequent disruptions had reflected in his farewell speech as well as he had said that the disruptions had “greatly eroded people’s faith in the efficacy of this great institution”.Speaking to The Indian Express on being quoted by the PM, Chatterjee said, “What should I say and feel about? He has chosen to quote me.” He said the “real objective of what he had said (then) is not being followed (even now). Disruption is going on”.The BJP was the main opposition when Chatterjee was the Speaker and much, if not all, of the disruption was caused by it. Chatterjee agreed that parties, when in opposition, behave in a certain manner and behave entirely differently when in power. “Very much so. When a party is at the receiving end, then it realises the importance of smooth functioning of Parliament,” he said.Chatterjee also slammed the slapping of sedition charges against JNUSU president Kanhaiya Kumar calling it “height of intolerance”.“It was the most unfortunate decision,” he said.Modi Thursday reproduced Chatterjee’s 2004 Bhim Sen Sachar Memorial Lecture. Chatterjee had said: “Stopping the sittings of the House... is totally counter-productive ...a feeling has developed among parties that interruption...will establish the importance of a subject or issue agitating one or another of the parties. Obstructing Parliament’s functioning should be equated with an expression of lack of confidence in the parliamentary system itself — if not as a declaration of war on the people of the country.”

