Headline::::Budget 2016: Punjab Chief Minister Terms It As 'Pro-Farmer, Balanced'



DateTime::::2016-02-29T18:10:05+05:30



Chandigarh:                             Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal today hailed the Union Budget 2016-17 as "pro-farmer, growth oriented, balanced and realistic" and thanked Finance Minister Arun Jaitley for allocating Rs. 100 crore for the 350th birth anniversary celebrations of Guru Gobind Singh.
Calling it an "unprecedented" decision, Mr Badal said the allocation for observing the tenth Sikh Guru's birthday celebrations was a matter of great pride and a "supreme gift" for Sikhs across the globe. He welcomed the government's allocation of nearly Rs. 36,000 crore for the farm sector and the raising of agri-credit target to Rs. nine lakh crore for the next fiscal, saying the measures would go a long way in ensuring well-being of the agricultural community.
He said it was a matter of great satisfaction and pride that the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government almost doubled the budgetary provisions for agriculture sector in fiscal 2016-17 over the current financial year.
Mr Badal also expressed happiness over the decision to encourage farmers to take up allied farming activities to supplement their income.
He hailed the decision of creating a dedicated long-term irrigation fund in (National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development) NABARD with an initial corpus of Rs. 20,000 crore to build irrigation facilities and initiation of a programme for sustainable management of ground water resources at an estimated cost of Rs. 6,000 crore.
The Chief Minister also welcomed a health insurance scheme which protects one-third of India's population against hospitalisation expenditure and decision to provide Below Poverty Lines (BPL) families with a cooking gas connection, supported by a government subsidy.(This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)



Author::::<a href="http://social.ndtv.com/groups.php?id=924001" target="_blank">bil</a>

Comment::::<div class="com_user_text">
                            please do not use the birth of our tenth master as an political point keep religion out of your dirty politics
                         </div>



