Headline::::Sri Sri Event: Swaraj Abhiyan Slams Centre, Delhi Government



DateTime::::2016-03-10T18:50:26+05:30



New Delhi:                             Swaraj Abhiyan leader Prashant Bhushan today attacked the Centre and Delhi government accusing them of "violating" rule and "destroying" environment by allowing World Culture Festival organised by Sri Sri Ravishankar's Art of Living Foundation on the flood plains of Yamuna river.
Both the governments have "violated" all norms and there is no fire clearance for the event, he alleged. He asked who will be liable if there is any kind of disaster. "Modi & Kejriwal govts come together to violate every rule & destroy Env to sponsor SriSri Circus. Both Supremos also agreed not to allow Lokpal! Violation of all Env rules, no fire clearance & corroded pipes used for stage. Will Modi/AK be held liable for disaster?(sic)" Mr Bhushan tweeted.
Taking a jibe at Arvind Kejriwal, another Swaraj Abhiyan leader Yogendra Yadav said the good news is that the Centre and Delhi government have come together but the bad news is that they have done so for endangering the environment.
"Good news: For once, Central and Delhi Govt come together Bad news: They do so to endanger environment (sic)," Mr Yadav tweeted.
With the National Green Tribunal (NGT) clearing the decks for a three-day cultural extravaganza of Art of Living Foundation on the flood plains of Yamuna river, the Centre had yesterday said such temporary programmes or structures "do not" require environment clearances.
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal had also welcomed the NGT verdict and said "politics and controversies" around the event should be "put to rest".
Mr Bhushan and Mr Yadav formed Swaraj Abhiyan after they were sacked from Aam Aadmi Party for "anti-party activities".(This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)



Author::::<a href="http://social.ndtv.com/groups.php?id=921117" target="_blank">RHJ</a>

Comment::::<div class="com_user_text">
                            How can temporary event not require clearances? Do they know that in US and Canada to immerse even 1 Ganpati idol for Visarjan in any river you need to take permissions from local authorities months in advance? Whatever may be your objective Cultural or Religious, Private or Collectively Public, the law of the land, rules, policies and procedures have to be followed. You may be a Bhagwan ka Avtaar still you need to follow the rules as Rama, Parsurama and Krishna Avtaars did.
                         </div>



