Headline::::Terror Attacks From Pakistan Have Gone Up: Government To Lok Sabha



DateTime::::2016-03-09T19:22:12+05:30



New Delhi:                             There has been a rise in attacks on India by Pakistan-based terrorists, government today told the Lok Sabha, noting it has been making efforts to have these terror networks and individuals banned by the UN.
Replying to a question in the Lok Sabha, Minister of State for External Affairs VK Singh said listing of several Pakistan-based terrorists like Hafiz Saeed and Zakiur Rahman Lakhvi, and entities including Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jamaat-ud-Dawaa under the UN Security Council's Resolution No 1267 was "successfully pursued".
"The government continues to pursue imposition and strict monitoring of 1267 regime on various pakistan-based individuals and terrorist organisations directing their activities against India.
"Our concerns regarding anti-India terrorism emanating from Pakistan have been taken up with the international community and also bilaterally with Pakistan on a number of occasions," Mr Singh said.
In this context, he also mentioned last year's attacks in Gurdaspur and Udhampur and the terror assault on Pathankot Air Force Station and at Pampore this year, noting such incidents have increased recently.
Mr Singh said India's concerns over cross border terrorism was also discussed by National Security Adviser with his Pakistani counterpart when they met in Bangkok in December last year.
"The two NSAs have also been in touch with each other following Pathankot attack in January regarding the follow up by Pakistan on actionable information provided by India concerning the attack," he said.
Replying to a separate question, Mr Singh said China is assisting Pakistan in developing the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC).
"Some of the proposed projects under CPEC are in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. Government's consistent position is that Pakistan has been in illegal occupation of parts of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir since 1947."
He said the government has conveyed to Chinese side, including at the highest level, its concerns about their activities in PoK and asked them to cease these activities.
To another query, he said required permission from Pakistan government for an officer in the Indian High Commission in Islamabad to travel to Lahore to attend the 12th SAARC Trade Fair from December 4-6 last year was not received.
He said the issue was taken up with Pakistan.
Replying to another question, Mr Singh said there is "no increase" in number of complaints against Indian diplomats posted in missions abroad. The number of complaints reported in 2013, 2014 and 2015 were 4,7 and 5 respectively.                



Author::::<a href="http://social.ndtv.com/groups.php?id=754021" target="_blank">Michael Smith</a>

Comment::::<div class="com_user_text">
                            How would China or US respond if they were constantly attacked by terrorists of a particular country? They'd never rely on the UN - because they are part of the UN Security council. Once again we are feeling the pain of decisions and inaction made by Nehru. We've got to have a plan to destroy the punks. The problem is Punks have Nuclear weapons and they are relying on free virgins after they die. Sooner or later we are going to have the ultimate solution to rid the world of these termites. China and US will indirectly suffer for holding a good country like India back and supporting evil. China, just imagine what you would have achieved had you just worked with India in honest friendship? YOu would not have the problems you have today - of course India would have benefited today. Instead you have an Islamic monster on your doorstep! You cannot appease them : Learn from the Taliban and Bin Laden and the US - Kissinger/Nixon/reagan created these house of horrors.
                         </div>



