Headline::::Women's Day War-Cry: 'Must Reclaim Right To Religion'



DateTime::::2016-03-08T23:14:46+05:30



Mumbai:                             Hundreds of Hindu and Muslim women gathered together in Mumbai's Azad Maidan today with just one goal on their mind - reclaiming their right to worship as equal citizens.
"This fight isn't just for a specific day. But since today is International Women's Day, we want to make the Government hear our voices," said Neetu Singh, a protester.
"According to the Constitution of our county men and women are equal. Therefore, women have as much right as men to enter these places of worship," added protester Aliyah Shaikh.Activist Trupti Desai, who heads an organisation called the Bhumata Brigade, has been leading the battle to end discrimination in temples. Ms Desai has been demanding women be allowed to enter the inner chambers of the Shani Temple in Ahmednagar district and the Trimbakeshwar Temple in Maharashtra.
"This is not just an insult to women, but to God as well. Equality is our constitutional right and if this isn't being followed then this is an insult to the constitution as well," said Ms Desai, after she was detained by the police before she could reach the Trimbakeshwar Temple.
The Bharatiya Muslim Mahila Andolan, headed by Noorjehan Niyaz, too has urged the Bombay High Court to lift the ban on women at the Haji Ali Dargah's sanctum sanctorum and now nervously awaits the court's verdict.
"This Women's Day we must reclaim our Right to Religion. Religious places of worship must be accessible to women. This discrimination must be stopped," said Ms Niyaz.
The Bombay High Court, meanwhile, is waiting for the Supreme Court's decision on whether menstruating girls and women should be allowed to enter the Sabrimala Temple in Kerala.
Till the Supreme Court announces its decision, women across different religions stand united, hoping for the best.                



Author::::<a href="http://social.ndtv.com/groups.php?id=754188" target="_blank">Sukumaran</a>

Comment::::<div class="com_user_text">
                            Let these women activists "exercise" their rights to "attend on to their parents &amp; parents in laws". There NO better POOJA (or) place of worship better than that !!
                         </div>



