Headline::::Government Seeks States' Views On Enhancing Road Safety



DateTime::::2016-03-06T13:36:54+05:30



New Delhi:                             Government has constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) from states to strategise on how to reduce road accidents in India, which accounts for the highest number of road deaths globally.
Rajasthan's Transport and Public Works Department Minister Yoonus Khan will head the eight-member group which will frame a National Road Safety Code with the aim to reduce fatalities and road accidents by 50 per cent in the next five years.
India accounts for as high as 5 lakh road accidents annually in which 1.5 lakh people die while another 3 lakh are crippled for life.
"The decision to constitute the GoM was taken in view of a very high number of road accidents. The group, after studying different aspects, will come up with their suggestions, which we would implement to reduce such fatalities," Road Transport and Highways Minister Nitin Gadkari told PTI.
The committee shall submit its first report by May 15, he said.
He said concerted efforts were being made to enhance road safety, including spending about Rs. 11,000 crore in next five years on fixing 726 identified black spots which cause maximum number of accidents.
Mr Gadkari said road accidents cause an annual loss of around Rs. 60,000 crore, or 3 per cent of the GDP, to the country and the initiatives by the government include correcting faulty road designs.
The GoM comprises Sidda Raghava Rao, (Transport, Roads and Buildings Minister, Andhra Pradesh), Chandrika Ray (Transport Minister, Bihar), Ramkrishna alias Sudin Dhavalikar (Public Works Department, River Navigation and Transport Minister, Goa), Ramalinga Reddy (Transport Minister, Karnataka), Diwakar Narayan Raote (Transport Minister, Maharashtra), John Rotluangliana (Transport Minister, Mizoram) and Ramesh Chandra Majhi (Transport Minister, Odisha).
Officials from different states will assist the GoM and its Chairman "will be free to co-opt ministers from other states as members depending upon their willingness", a notification in this regard said.
The GoM will assist the National Road Safety Council and will chalk out strategies for incorporating technology for assessment for driving licenses and vehicle fitness assessment.
It would work for improving public service delivery in respect of driving licenses, transfer of personal vehicles, NOC for driving licenses, among other areas.
As per the notification, it will also work for standardisation of accident investigation and reporting mechanism, policy changes and implementation of strategies for strengthening State Road Transport Undertakings and improving public transport in states.
The Committee is mandated to meet at least once a quarter.                



Author::::<i>Anonymous</i>

Comment::::<div class="com_user_text">
                            Use Horns please so prepare to use OK..
                         </div>



