Headline::::Ishrat Jehan Case: Court To Hear Plea For Quashing Action Against Gujarat Cops Next Week



DateTime::::2016-03-03T19:04:24+05:30



New Delhi:                             The Supreme Court would hear on March 11 a plea seeking quashing of criminal prosecution, suspension and other actions taken against Gujarat cops in the 2004 alleged fake encounter killing of Ishrat Jehan in view of recent testimony of jailed Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) operative David Headley.
The matter, which was mentioned for urgent hearing before a bench comprising Chief Justice TS Thakur and Justice UU Lalit on March 1, will now be heard on March 11, sources said. The plea, filed by advocate ML Sharma, refers to the statement recorded by David Headley, the Pakistani-American terrorist, in a Mumbai court that Ishrat Jehan was a LeT operative.
Gujarat Police personnel, including the then Deputy Inspector General (DIG) DG Vanzara, are facing trial in a Mumbai court for their alleged role in the encounter.
The plea, which cited the recent statements before a special court recorded by David Headley, who allegedly conspired with LeT in plotting the 26/11 Mumbai attacks, said the facts are now undisputed that all four persons killed by Gujarat Police, including Ishrat Jehan, were terrorists.
"The judicial proceeding and statement of David Headley, who conspired with LeT in plotting the 26/11 Mumbai attacks, stated via video conference and recorded in the special court at Mumbai that four persons, including Ishrat Jahan who were killed in June 2004 by Gujarat Police, were a part of LeT terrorist organisation belonging to Pakistan and they were assigned to kill then Chief Minister of Gujarat, Narendra Modi," it said.
The plea sought a direction to close criminal proceedings and action taken in First Information Reports lodged by Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) against the Gujarat Police personnel and others, saying it was unconstitutional within the judicial facts and evidences of David Headley.
It also sought a direction from the court declaring that killing of a terrorist is not an offence under Indian law and proper compensation be paid to the state police personnel in the interest of justice.
It also wanted initiation of suo motu perjury/contempt proceedings against the then Home Minister and CBI Director for concealing true facts before the Supreme Court and the Gujarat High Court and for filing a false affidavit pertaining to facts about Ishrat Jehan case.(This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)



Author::::<a href="http://social.ndtv.com/groups.php?id=265149" target="_blank">Tara chhetri</a>

Comment::::<div class="com_user_text">
                            I am still not convinced that Ishrat Jahan was a terrorist. The timing and the revealations are suspect David Headley could be bought and tutored
                         </div>



