Headline::::BJP Announces Names Of 88 Candidates For Assam Assembly Elections



DateTime::::2016-03-10T00:44:52+05:30



New Delhi:                             BJP tonight announced the names of 88 candidates for the Assam Assembly polls including those of its chief ministerial candidate Sarbananda Sonowal, former Congress leader Himanta Biswa Sarma and Lok Sabha member Kamakhya Prasad Tasha, who has been fielded against Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi.
The party's Central Election Committee (CEC) cleared the names for all but two of the 90 seats it will contest in the polls for the 126-member state Assembly.
The party also cleared 52 candidates for the election to 294-member West Bengal Assembly.
Party chief Amit Shah chaired the meeting which was attended by Prime Minister Narendra Modi besides other CEC members.
"Our list of candidates has the representation of greater Assamese society. It is a reflection of greater Assam," Union Minister and party's Parliamentary Board secretary JP Nadda told a press conference.
Several Congress legislators, who joined the saffron party along with Mr Sarma, have been given tickets as well.
Seeking to corner Mr Gogoi in his constituency, BJP has pitted its lawmaker Tasha from the Congress leader's constituency of Titabor.
Mr Sonowal will contest from Majuli, a reserved seat for ST, while Mr Sarma has been fielded from Jalukbari.
The party's decision to contest 90 seats means that some of its candidates will have a friendly fight with allies like AGP or Bodoland People's Front.
"We had announced Mission 84 for Assam. So we had to fight a few seats more than this. Some of the fight will be strategic," a leader said, adding that some smaller allies will field their candidates on the BJP's symbol.
Terming infiltration from Bangladesh as a major poll issue, BJP has forged a rainbow coalition with several regional outfits in its bid to wrest power from the Congress which has been ruling the state for the last 15 years. Assam goes to the polls in two phases on April 4 and 11.
BJP also announced the names of 52 candidates for the West Bengal Assembly polls.
Chandra Kumar Bose, grandnephew of Subhas Chandra Bose, has been fielded against Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in Bhawanipur constituency.
State party chief Dilip Ghosh will contest Kharagpur Sadar seat.
Bengali film and TV actress Locket Chatterjee will contest Mayureswar while Samik Bhattacharya, who became the first BJP legislator in the Assembly after winning a bypoll, will fight from Basirhat Dakshin, which he currently represents.
Actor Joy Banerjee will try his luck from Suri.                



Author::::<a href="http://social.ndtv.com/groups.php?id=251383" target="_blank">Smart Doe</a>

Comment::::<div class="com_user_text">
                            Assam desperately needs change of guards as it aspires to become a state that not only talks of development but implements that. Gogoi has been one of the worst leaders in the history of Assam. We now hope that people of Assam do some introspection and decide what is best for them. Their choice won't be Congress for sure.
                         </div>



