While driving past Patna's Gandhi Maidan, its crowded Ashok Rajpath and single-screen cinemas showing salaciously titled Bhojpuri films like Saiyyan Toofani featuring unmentionable songs, you come across an unexpected sight: a tennis club in the middle of a bustling crowd and a polluted market.Patna once boasted of several lush-green tennis courts in the government secretariat. But some years ago, they were pulled down for renovation. Since then, tennis is limited to the courts near Gandhi Maidan.Yet, the ongoing election in the state is full of tennis imagery and references to its scoring pattern. "This is a five-setter that won't end till the last point is scored," says Bihar Congress spokesperson Chandan Yadav.The five-phase schedule of the Bihar election has inspired the tennis analogy. In addition, the two rivals — NDA and Grand Alliance —are confident of winning two sets each. The outcome of the match depends on the fifth and final set.Voters wait in queues to cast their votes at a polling station in Begusarai on Monday during the first phase of Bihar assembly elections. PTIPhase I ended on Monday morning with voting for 49 constituencies. Most of the seats that went to polls in this round are considered bastions of the Nitish Kumar-led alliance because of their social composition — more rural seats, domination of Muslims and Yadavs. In 2010, the BJP-JD(U) combine had won 29 of these seats.The vote percentage of 57 percent in the first phase was significantly higher than the 51 percent polling in 2010. It was higher also than the polling in these segments in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections.So, who is winning the first set?"We will sweep the elections, RJD will win all the 19 seats it is contesting," Lalu Prasad Yadav said with characteristic optimism. The NDA said it will win 36 out of the 49 seats in this phase.Till a few years ago, a higher turnout was seen as a sign of anti-incumbency. But the Delhi election, and before that the trend in Gujarat, turned this logic on its head when the ruling party gained from the increased turnout. So, it is difficult to say if the 7% extra voters in the booths were inspired by change or status-quo.The BJP would have had reasons to worry had the turnout been low. Bihar's fields are lush-green at the moment because of near-harvest crops; farmers tending to them are reluctant to leave them unattended. A low turnout would have indicated that committed voters from the minority community and Yadavs had voted while others had stayed back in the fields. But that doesn't seem to have happened.For the grand alliance, the major worry was that the cadres of the JD (U), RJD and Congress may not work together because of their differences. But, there was no sign of friction within the various components of the alliance in the first round.Recent elections have shown that whenever the numbers at poll booths go up, it is mainly because of the enthusiasm of first-time voters and youth. In Bihar, around 30 percent of the total electorate is from the 18-30 age group. Obviously, they have participated in large numbers. So, those selling development as the theme of the election have reasons to be optimistic.The BJP had a lead of around 5% over its rivals in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls. But its vote share came down from 45.3% to 37.3 per cent in by-elections just a few months later. In contrast, the vote share of the alliance went up from 40.3 to 44.9 per cent.Many experts have pointed out that the BJP vote share has fallen consistently after May 2014. Others have argued that the BJP peaked in May 2014 and would find it difficult to touch the Lok Sabha highs again.But, the number crunchers ignore a crucial factor: Jitan Ram Manjhi. Since the 2014 Lok Sabha polls and the subsequent by-elections, Manjhi has defected to the NDA. If he has brought his Mahadalit vote bank with him, the NDA would regain lost ground.If not; it could be game, set and match Nitish Kumar.

