A gang of gunmen riding on a motorcycle reportedly sprayed bullets and killed vice president of BJP in Bihar Visheshwar Ojha in Sonbarsa area in Ara district on Friday evening. Ojha was 45. This is the second murder in two weeks. LJP functionary Brijnath Singh was mowed down by criminals firing from AK-47 assault rifles in Patna's congested Kachchi Dargah locality a week ago.Screenshot from Ojha's Facebook pageOjha was shot dead in his SUV while returning from a wedding. BJP called it a “political killing” and served 72-hour ultimatum to the state government to arrest killers of Ojha or else face state-wide protest, reports The Indian Express.Sources said it was around 4.30 pm when Ojha and BJP party leaders were travelling in the village in a Tata Safari.His vehicle was intercepted by a group of assailants who were in a motorcycle. According to an eye-witness, one of the gunmen sprayed bullets at him - killing him instantly. He was declared brought dead in a local hospital, reports CNN IBN.Immediately all the nearby police stations were alerted and a massive combing operation has been launched to arrest the killers.BJP National General Secretary and in-charge of Bihar, Bhupender Yadav expressed shock over the incident. "Shocked to learn about broad day light murder of Bihar BJP leader Visheshwar Ojha. My condolences go to the family," he tweeted.The incident once again raised serious questions about the law and order situation in the state.Senior BJP leader P. Muralidhar Rao, in-charge of Karnataka, tweeted, "Jungle Raj back to Bihar. BJP leader Sh. Visheshwar Ojha's murder points to increasing goondaism &failure of law and order under Nitish govt."Earlier, state BJP leader Sushil Kumar Modi and other central party leaders citing series of crime incidents including murder of two engineers in Darbhanga had raised the slogan of jungle raj-2 in the state.Union Minister and LJP President Ram Vilas Paswan and Hindustani Awam Morcha chief Jitan Ram Manjhi too had sharpened attack on law and order situation in Bihar. So far no one has been arrested.With Agencies

