by Vivek Avasthi'Jai Bhim – Jai MIM’ is the war cry for Asaduddin Owaisi's AIMIM which is testing waters in Uttar Pradesh panchayat election. With the announcement of 50 candidates in 18 districts of the state, the party is trying to sneak into the vote base of the Samajwadi Party and the Bahujan Samaj Party. Apart from a majority of Muslim candidates, the AIMIM has made its intentions clear by pitching thirty percent non-Muslims, which include Backwards and Dalits.It started as a ‘hate’ party, confined to a small pocket of Hyderabad and in public notice for the controversies its leaders created with their speeches, before developing the ambition to spread base. Contesting two dozen seats in the Seemanchal region of Bihar now, the Owaisi-led party is keen on making inroads in the Hindi heartland. The panchayat election in UP is an experimental run before the 2017 assembly elections.Asaduddin Owaisi. PTIThe lesser known outfit claims it has made inroads in 66 districts of the state by enrolling 7.5 lakh members initially. In addition to this, the party claims it has formed its units in 45 districts, with its state headquarters in Lucknow. A mere Rupees two per person is being taken as a token for taking in members.The party is fielding candidates mainly in Lucknow, Faizabad, Azamgarh, Gonda, Sultanpur, Basti, Khalilabad and other districts of eastern and western Uttar Pradesh. The AIMIM is also gearing up for the upcoming by-polls in two vacant seats of UP - Bikapur in Faizabad and Muzaffarnagar.To make his intention clear about being projected as a serious player, Owaisi had wasted no time in reaching Village Bisara in Dadri in Greater Noida where 50-year-old Akhlaq had been lynched by a mob on allegations of consuming beef. He launched a two-pronged attack on the BJP and the Samajwadi Party, saying that these two political outfits were hand-in-glove in playing divisive vote bank politics.Owaisi is quite upset with the UP government. He tells Firstpost that in the recent past, his rallies have been cancelled at least 11 times by the district administrations in several places at the last minute on the pretext that his speeches would spread communal tension. Prohibitory orders under section 144 were imposed to prevent ‘unlawful’ gathering every time.His party functionaries question why there is no ban on BJP leaders like Sakshi Maharaj, Yogi Adityanath and Sadhvi Prachi who freely make inflammatory and hate speeches. Owaisi also questions what he calls the double standards of the present state government by asking how as a Member of Parliament, he can speak in Lok Sabha, but not address public rallies in UP. The AIMIM has moved the Allahabad High Court over this.However, Owaisi has managed making headlines in the state by attending some Iftar parties in his personal capacity in some cities. While he has been openly criticising the Samajwadi Party and the BJP for fostering communal tension in the state, he has refrained from launching an attack on Mayawati and her Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP). Reasons for this are amply clear. His party is eyeing the Dalit vote base along with the minority vote. For the 2017 UP assembly elections, the AIMIM is said to be preparing to field candidates from about 130 seats where Muslims constitute over twenty percent of the electorate.On allegations of the AIMIM being an organisation funded by the BJP, Owasisi retorts that "BJP wants to ban my party in Maharashtra and Najma Heptullah has termed me as the modern day Jinnah, then how do these allegations stand. He says that he has already filed a criminal defamation against senior Congressman Digvijaya Singh who had made a similar statement against him.On being labelled as a communal leader, Owaisi says "When I was with the UPA for eight years, I was secular and a holy cow and now that I am opposing them I have become communal". He adds that these parties treated Muslims and Dalits as ‘political hostages’.Owaisi minces no words in speaking for reservation for Muslims. He says that reservation to the community should be granted on the basis of their social and educational backwardness. He cites the examples of Karnataka, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala, where Muslim reservation has helped the community on the whole. Uttar Pradesh records the highest Muslim population than any other state in India.A new political outfit, Peace Party, led by Dr. Mohammad Ayub Ansari, had emerged in UP during the last assembly elections in 2012. The party won four seats and got the fifth highest votes amongst all parties. But within no time, three MLAs deserted the party, leaving Dr. Ayub the lone MLA and president of the party. On being asked the fate of AIMIM could be similar to that of Peace Party, Owaisi says the choice of candidates in UP will be such that they win or lose, they will not leave the party.The AIMIM got the first taste of success outside their home turf in the Maharashtra assembly elections in 2014. The party had fielded 24 candidates out of which two registered victory. This was not the end of the dream run as three of its candidates from Solapur Central, Parbhania and Aurangabad East finished second while eight contestants from Nanded South, Aurangabad West, Vandera East, Versova, Malegaon, Mumbra, Kuria and Mumbadevi finished at unexpected number three positions. In Maharashtra its candidates had pulled in 5,16,632 votes.

