Kolkata: Sending out a strong message against "factionalism" within the TMC ahead of the assembly polls in the state, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Friday warned of stern action against those who are trying to use party platform to serve personal interests.She also rebuked veteran TMC MP Saugata Roy for "imposing" his own views over those of the party."The party will decide who will get a ticket or not. We will not tolerate factionalism. We will not bow before protests," Banerjee said.Lashing out at section of party workers, the Trinamool Congress supremo said those who have just joined it should not think of becoming MLAs, MPs within a few days.Mamata Banerjee. File photo. PTI"Those who have just joined the party should not think that they will become MP/ MLA the very next day. I had come through student and youth politics. I had joined politics in mid seventies and contested Lok Sabha election in 1984 from Jadavpur constituency as many were unwilling to contest that seat then. Then I fought for 30 years," Banerjee said."They (new members) should know the history of our party's struggle in Nandigram and Singur. TMC is not the platform to serve personal interests. We will not tolerate it if anyone tries to use the party as a platform to serve their own interest over the interest of the party," she said.Lashing out against the recent factional fueds at Nanoor in Birbhum district, she said TMC is not the place for those who are thinking of increasing their own influence by compromising the party's interest."They are free to go wherever they want to. In TMC you don't need to be part of lobbying. TMC is a party where tickets are not sold, it is the party leadership that decides who will get ticket."Openly rebuking Roy, whose recent comments did not go down well with the TMC leadership, she said "I request leaders like Sougata da not to impose his own personal views over the views of the party. This effects the party badly."I tell this to everyone don't try to impose your personal views on the party. We all should remember that we should not do any such thing which weakens the party. You have to remember that our existence lies with this party," she added.PTI

