Let’s put the disclaimer in the beginning itself. The first vote has not been cast in the Bihar elections. It’s a long election and anything can go wrong for parties at any point. One slip of tongue from the canniest of leaders could see his party's prospects nose-diving. All voters may not have made up their minds on the candidate of their choice. Thus there’s nothing definitive about what we have in the story below. But yes, it’s interesting.Nitish Kumar is fighting perhaps the biggest battle of his long political career against the toughest of opponents. And he seems to be on a stronger wicket at the moment. According to a CNN-IBN-Axis My India survey, the alliance led by him might end up with as many as 137 seats, give or take eight seats. The NDA may end up with 95. With many other surveys placing the BJP-led formation far ahead, the results of this survey may serve as a reminder for it to get over any complacency it may have.PTI imageAs per the survey, Nitish’s party, Janata Dal(U) is likely to win between 64-74 seats of the 100 seats it is contesting and Lalu Yadav’s RJD is likely to win around 48 out of its 100. The Congress seems to be enjoying the spillover effect of whatever is working for the bigger partners. It might end up with 19-21 seats.On the other hand the BJP, according to the survey, may end up with limited success, winning 77-87 of the 160 it is contesting. Its partners are likely to bring a maximum of 16 seats to the NDA’s kitty.So what’s the big takeaway from the survey? Nitish Kumar is seen as a performer by a good number of voters. His political decisions in the last couple of years may have annoyed many, but hasn't done enough to erase his track record as a man who can provide governance to a state which has had a terrible history . In the survey, 43 percent of respondents felt he was the best chief ministerial candidate. Sushil Modi of the BJP was favoured by 33 percent. Others were left far behind.This perhaps is the reason the grand alliance of the JD(U), RJD and the Congress won’t mind making the elections personality-centric. In Nitish it has a reliable face to project, the opposition does not have any. Prime Minister Narendra Modi may be hugely popular across a cross-section of voters, but his alliance maybe hit due by the absence of a strong match for Nitish at the state level. The BJP may argue that it won in Haryana and Jharkhand without projecting any chief ministerial candidate, but the fact remains that it had to contend with incumbents who were largely discredited. As the survey reflects, that is not the case in Bihar.As many as 40 percent of the respondents said they would vote on the basis of the performance of the state government and 38 percent said development was the main issue this time around. If the grand alliance is expected to garner 46 percent of votes against the NDA’s 38 percent, it can thank the good governance provided by Nitish over the last decade.A part of it could be due to the utilization of smart campaigning techniques borrowed from the BJP by the JD(U). For someone who is reputed to be reticent about interacting with the masses, programmes like har ghar dastak may have worked for Nitish and people are more aware of his achievements now.The BJP, of course, knows Bihar won’t be a cakewalk despite political pundits predicting otherwise. If there’s a ‘wave’ in the party’s favour, they have not noticed it yet. Almost all its central leaders, including ministers and party president Amit Shah, have been busy in the state for several weeks. Narendra Modi has a number of rallies lined up across the state. If the predictions of the CNN-IBN survey come true, it will be a huge embarrassment for the BJP, particularly after its experience in Delhi. The party’s winning streak in the country may finally halt. And with it could go its economic agenda. The realization of this is spurring a sense of urgency is the BJP camp.But, let’s remember, it’s only a pre-poll survey and it's too early to jump to any conclusion.

