Partly out of habit, but mainly due to financial compulsions, males in bucolic Bihar prefer a distinct sartorial style: the adults don't dress above the waist and the boys don't wear anything below it. Rural wisdom suggests adequately attired males in a village is a clear sign of a public function, or a visit by an important woman.On Tuesday afternoon, in many villages of Mahuwa constituency of Hajipur, men in lungi-kurtas and boys in vests and shorts were the only sign of Rabri Devi's gruelling "vote-for-my-sons" yatra. Nothing else, not even the police entourage that outnumbered supporters one to ten, suggested that a former CM was around.The story goes that Lalu Prasad Yadav was not keen on grooming his elder son for politics. He was more eager to bequeath his legacy to Tejasvi, who showed encouraging signs of a budding politician.To keep Tej Pratap out of politics, the Yadav patriarch helped the elder sibling start a business away from home. The younger Tejasvi, meanwhile, was pushed into politics as a star speaker in the 2010 poll campaign.Rabri Devi in Mahua. Image courtesy: Sandipan/FirstpostBut the mother intervened and insisted on equal distribution of the family's political legacy. The result: Yadav's sons Tej Pratap and Tejasvi are both in the fray from two adjoining constituencies of Hajipur, just a few kilometre from Patna. The elder son is locked in a Yadav triangle in Mahuwa while the younger Tejasvi is battling for survival in Raghopur.Rabri Devi is now sharing the burden of the parental decision by going from door to door for the future of her sons. "Sharbat pila do, garmi hai," she says in a plaintive voice on stopping outside a house in Hasanpur Osti. The village has a large number of Muslims and Paswan voters. Rabri Devi knows every sip could help her fill up the ballot box.So, Rabri Devi sips from every glass and eats from every plate that is offered in Hasanpur Osti. When she finds women waiting at an intersection, Rabri Devi rolls down the windows of her SUV and holds her hand in a mix of greeting and plea.She doesn't speak much, except when asking for sharbat. A party worker does most of the talking and promising: "Madam will take care. Don't get misled by others. Stay united," he says while Rabri Devi silently sips from the glass offered.Saviour save thyselfThis is a strange election. Two leaders, who are believed to possess the political power to save Narendra Modi, Nitish Kumar and Bihar are, ironically, are busy engaged in pettier battles protecting their own backyards.Jitan Ram Manjhi, the purported savoir of NDA and key to the Mahadalit vote bank, is locked in a desperate fight in Makhdumpur (Jahanabad) and Imamganj (Gaya). After filing his nomination from Makhdumpur, Manjhi is believed to have got so spooked by the adverse feedback that he filed his nomination from Imamganj without consulting the BJP. Though there is growing consensus that the BJP may win the election because of the Manjhi factor, nobody knows the if the man himself will be part of the next Assembly.Lalu Yadav's case isn't different. His Muslim-Yadav vote is widely believed to be the factor keeping Nitish Kumar's hopes alive in the election. But, he is finding it extremely difficult to save his sons from defeat.It has been years since a member of the family, that ruled Bihar for more than a decade, has won an election. Rabri Devi lost from two constituencies in 2010, Misa Bharti was humbled in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls. The two brothers-in-law, Subhash and Sadhu, who once dreamt of taking forward the legacy, have long been ostracised. And Lalu Yadav himself has been barred from contesting because of his conviction in the fodder scam.Ram Umed Rai, 55, is standing outside his farm in Ghospur Chakmujahid, a small village on the Mahuwa-Gajipur Road. Since Rabri Devi is not expected to visit the area, Rai is wearing just a lungi, his youngest of three children is wearing nothing.Rai says Yadavs and the Muslims in the constituency will vote for Lalu Yadav. His own reason is personal: In 2007, Rai was arrested by cops for selling kerosene in the black market. He was released on bail after three months when his lawyer convinced the judge he couldn't have carried 120-litre kerosene and two kids on a bicycle because the rim of the wheel would have snapped under the load."During Lalu Yadav's raj, nobody stopped me from selling kerosene. But Nitish Kumar allowed the police to follow the law. As a result, I had to go to jail and shut down my side business," Rai laments.Now that Lalu Yadav is part of the alliance, Rai is hoping that his own golden days will return. On his hopes, depends the future of Lalu Yadav's dynasty.

