There is a lovely saying in Hindi that Asaduddin Owaisi may have heard: Chaubeyji wanted to become Chhabeyji but ended up becoming Dubeyji. Loosely translated it implies an ambitious gentleman wanted to progress to six from four but ended up at two because of his mistake.That is Owaisi for you in Bihar, who, in his bid to play the role of the leader of Muslims in India, jumped into the battle of Bihar only to be reduced to a blink-and-you'll-miss-him extra.To carry forward the Chaubeyji analogy, Owaisi's party is indeed contesting in six constituencies. But his dream of becoming the messiah of minorities has been reduced to fighting a losing battle in just Purnia district of Bihar.AFP imageEven in these six assembly seats, the AIMIM has been relegated to the role of a wannabe vote-katwa, a term voters in Bihar use liberally for those in fray only to harm others.Owaisi had entered the election with a lot of fanfare, claiming that he would be a gamechanger in the Muslim-dominated Seemanchal area. His grand entry lead to silent jubilation in the NDA, where leaders were convinced that he will seriously harm the poll prospects of the JD(U)-RJD-Congress alliance by snaring Muslim voters in four districts--Purnia, Araria, Kishanganj and Katihar. But Owaisi is now destined to become the proverbial Dubeyji of the election."Mind you, neither me nor my party ever said we would be contesting all seats in Bihar and campaigning all over the state. Our decision, based on our political assessment, is clear that we will contest and campaign only in six seats in the Purnia district," Owaisi told newspapers, claiming his party was a serious contender.His volte-face has led to a lot of speculation. But, there is just one reason behind his about-turn: the backlash among Muslims, who saw him as a tacit supporter of the NDA.Bihar may have the image of a state handicapped by poverty and illiteracy. But, the level of political awareness among people even in remote villages can give poll pundits a serious complex. At every corner in the state, you will find a psephologist, usually dressed in a lungi, in the company of semi-naked children and a couple buffaloes, armed with facts, figures, data and latest trends. Undoubtedly, Owaisi listened to the chatter on the streets and in chaupals of rural Bihar and decided discretion was the better part of poll valour."Till a few weeks ago, Owaisi was a hero in Bihar. People would leave everything and sit in front of TV to hear him speak. But now we switch it off the moment he appears," says Merajul Islam Mallick of Andwas village near Nalanda.Andwas is one of the many villages in Bihar whose name doesn't mean anything in any language of the world. Villagers say it is a queer mix of Mandarin and Pali, which were both prevalent in the region because of the presence of Buddhist and Chinese scholars in Nalanda.In Bihar, similarly, Owaisi's politics has very little meaning because of the presence of the Mahagathbandhan, which, Muslims feel, is better poised to take on the BJP. Interestingly, the presence of Lalu Prasad Yadav and the Congress gives the alliance greater credibility among Muslims than the face of Nitish Kumar.Trapped in an image: Why AIMIM's Asaduddin Owaisi needs to exit Bihar pollsAlert and connected, young Muslims in Bihar find Facebook is a smart way to affect votesBreaking the jinx: BJP's got its formula right, but can it win Bihar finally?Owaisi's balloon has been punctured mid-flight because of sharp criticism of his plan to jump into a contest balanced on a needle's edge. Soon after he announced his participation, the allegation that his party is following a covert strategy of undermining the Mahagathbandhan gathered momentum in Bihar and turned his prospective voters against the AIMIM. The message that emerged from the ground was this: lay off.Owaisi had no option but to cut his losses and confine his fight to just six seats, by all means a symbolic gesture to avoid embarrassment. To control the damage because of rumours of his party being hand-in-glove with the BJP, Owaisi is now exhorting voters to support 'secular' candidates who can beat the BJP. His decibel level is so low that nobody is paying any attention, obviating the need for people like Mallick to switch off their TV sets.

