It seems it is his fate to have honourable, even ignoble, voices demand that he pull out from the electoral arena every time he decides to step into it. At his refusal to accede to such requests, as in Bihar now, Asaduddin Owaisi will be accused, without evidence, of stitching a secret deal with the BJP.This is ironical considering that Owaisi opposes the BJP stridently. He describes it as communal, fires salvos against it for targetting Muslims, and is first off the blocks to commiserate with those who are victims of its divisive programmes, as he recently did in the incident involving the lynching of Mohammad Akhlaq in UP’s Dadri town.His fiery, at times intemperate, speeches explain only partially his rising stock among Muslims. It is also because he is articulate in both English and Urdu, dresses his criticism in the modern ideas of rights and justice, and possesses the skills of a seasoned debater. His attire and his neatly trimmed beard add to his mystique. To many, Owaisi’s persona represents the possibility of being a religious Muslim and yet be accomplished in the modern sense of it.A file image of Owaisi. PTI imageAll this on its own might not have created the image trap for him; this trap is created by his propensity to employ his trademark rhetoric against the Congress and other state-based outfits, all of whom represent the anti-BJP forces. Owaisi accuses them of exploiting the fear of Muslims about the BJP to garner their votes, and then doing little to economically uplift the community. This is deliberate, he argues, because all these parties presume that the Muslims will vote the one among them best placed to vanquish the BJP.By contrast, Owaisi argues his agenda is to work for the economic development of Muslims, often quoting the Sachar Commission report which said their status is no better than that of Dalits. For a politician who wears the markers of his religious identity, it did seem surprising to hear him demand, as he recently did, that the Hajj subsidy of Rs 600 crore should be diverted to fund scholarships for Muslim girls. It is unlikely you will hear any of the non-BJP parties raise such a demand.His politics, therefore, combines a medley of three distinct elements – equidistance from the BJP and its rivals, his passionate but articulate community-specific rhetoric, and mooting of pragmatic policy ideas.However, his equidistance from the BJP and the Congress and the rest becomes contentious when the electorate is sharply polarized between them. This echoes the problem the AAP too encountered on its electoral debut in Delhi in 2013. It was said the AAP couldn’t win the Assembly election on its own, but would only fragment the Congress vote to the BJP’s advantage.But there are two distinct differences between him and AAP. One, he is perceived to be a community leader who expresses Muslim grievances and Muslim demands. Two, unlike AAP, he doesn’t aim to form governments in any of the states he contests in, choosing to field candidates in only a handful of seats.The AIMIM contested in 24 seats in Maharashtra and won two. Yet again, the party plans to field candidates in just 24 out of Bihar’s 243 constituencies. Since nobody expects him to sweep all 24, even a reasonable showing in the election won’t enable Owaisi to play a pivotal role in case Bihar’s voters deliver a hung Assembly.What exactly is Owaisi’s gameplan then?It is possible he is testing the electoral model that BSP leader Kanshi Ram evolved and perfected. That model in its essence was a two-step one. In the first step it wasn’t considered necessary for a fledgling party to win on its first outings as it was to determine who among the seasoned players musters a majority to form the government. This entailed destruction of the support base of one of a traditionally dominant party.For the BSP, this first step implied winning the support of the Dalits, a group to which Ram belonged, and undermining Congress dominance, substantially dependent as it was on Dalit support. The model’s second step envisaged expanding the BSP’s base among other social groups, particularly the lower OBCs and Muslims, to win a majority on its own.Statues of Mayawati and Kanshi Ram. PTI imageSubstitute Dalits for Muslims and you can fathom what Owaisi is attempting. Like Ram, Owaisi intends to establish his credentials as the principal voter-puller in his own community. It, therefore, becomes imperative for him to rail, rightly or wrongly, against the parties which poll substantial Muslim votes, precisely what Ram too had done.Then again, Ram in his early days spoke of the convergence of the interests of Dalits, lower OBCs and Muslims. Owaisi has followed Ram’s rhetoric on this score as well. Note, for instance, his propensity to club Muslims and other subaltern social groups in one category in every interview he gives to the media.From this perspective, he, like Ram, is trying to emerge as the arbiter of his community’s choices and interests. He can’t assume this role unless he demonstrates to the non-BJP parties that he has it in him to spoil their electoral prospects. This point can be proved tellingly through an eye-catching performance in the Muslim heartland of Bihar’s Seemanchal region, where the 24 constituencies that AIMIM will contest in the state are located.Seemanchal, in fact, is an ideal terrain for him – the Muslim community is less likely to feel insecure, because of the BJP’s Hindutva politics, in the area where they are numerous. In contrast to other parts of Bihar, Seemanchal might be more amenable to Owaisi’s development rhetoric.After establishing his credentials of attracting Muslim votes, Owaisi can hope to work out a better deal for his own party – and impliedly, for the community as well – through an electoral alliance. This, again, was the path Kanshi Ram took to pitchfork the BSP among the principal contenders for power in Uttar Pradesh.But Owaisi seems to have glossed over the crucial difference between Dalit and Muslim politics. For one, security is a predominant factor behind the voting choice of Muslims, as umpteen surveys have shown. This is what turns them into an implacable opponent of the BJP. By contrast, the factor of security has receded in importance for Dalits over the last three-four decades. The twin issues of power and development are consequently of greater concern to them now.Therefore, should the BJP win and Owaisi becomes the reason for the Grand Alliance losing ground in Seemanchal, even Muslims would see him as a spoiler who worked to the BJP’s advantage. A victorious BJP in Bihar will have the Hindutva hotheads assert themselves, as has been seen elsewhere, thereby further fanning the insecurities of the Muslim community elsewhere. This could undermine Owaisi’s plan to fan out in other states, particularly UP, which goes to the polls in 2017.Conversely, should the Grand Alliance win Bihar and Owaisi doesn’t emerge as a spoiler, the basic assumption of his plan would collapse – he won’t be seen as a Muslim vote-puller across India. This will also end the possibility of his gathering votes of other subaltern groups.Even in the most conducive circumstance, Owaisi will find it a problem to attract Dalit votes. This is largely because of the crisis of image he suffers from. Should Dalits and lower OBCs desert Mayawati and the BSP, they would most likely prefer the BJP’s idea of Hindutva plus development than Owaisi’s plan of forging a radical social alliance. In this context, his image of a radical Muslim will undeniably become a repelling factor.Ominous signs for the BJP ahead of 2017 UP polls: Dalits are distancing themselves from the partyThe Alt-Politics series: Promises of Utopia end up turning into a fight to maintain status quoWhat nationalism? Owaisi brings up BJP's alliance with PDP, accuses Modi govt of double standardsThis is why Owaisi should withdraw from Seemanchal, which goes to the polls on 5 November and where the last date for withdrawal of candidature is 19 October. His move will be in sharp contrast to that of Mulayam Singh Yadav, who, despite heading the Janata Parivar, chose to ditch it, allegedly at the BJP’s prompting.It is important for Owaisi to distinguish himself from Yadav, who he accuses of exploiting the fear of Muslims to garner their votes and doing little for their socio-economic uplift. But before withdrawing from Bihar he could demand a guarantee from his community leaders that they wouldn’t ask him to sit out of the UP polls, and also speak out against Yadav’s politics.Ajaz Ashraf is a journalist from Delhi. His novel, The Hour Before Dawn, published by HarperCollins, is available in bookstores.

