Our justifiable obsession with the idea of development will have the pundits credit the Grand Alliance’s thumping victory in Bihar to Nitish Kumar. But whichever way you look at the Bihar result, it is decidedly Lalu Prasad Yadav who must be declared Man of the Match of the electoral contest there.Forget the number of seats Lalu’s RJD won or the percentage of votes it polled in comparison to Nitish’s JD(U). It simply can’t be denied that the Grand Alliance won Bihar because Lalu simply altered the script of the electoral battle there. He was quick to latch on to RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat’s injudicious comment on reservations, demanding that a committee of experts should fix a time-frame before rolling back the policy of affirmative action.Indeed, Bhagwat’s remark was the cricketing equivalent of dropping a catch offered by the rival team’s best batsman. The chance the Sangh Parivar gave to the Grand Alliance was exploited to the hilt by Lalu. He turned it into the electoral battle in Bihar into one between the forward and backward castes.File image of Nitish Kumar and Lalu Yadav. PTIThis, he did through his customary style — mocking the BJP for representing the interests of the upper caste, accusing it of harbouring the hidden agenda of re-establishing the dominant social group’s hegemony, and reminding the lower castes that a BJP government in Bihar will roll back the gains that accrued to them because of his rule.These gains were not material, he argued. Lalu said the electoral battle was about preserving their self-respect and dignity, about not having to cringe and bend before upper caste landlords. Popular memory runs deep in India. Twenty-five years ago, it was on the turf of Bihar that the Mandal forces had won their most spectacular victory, winning as many as 49 seats out of 54 in undivided Bihar. It was Lalu who had been the architect of that victory, in the process smashing the control of upper castes on bank, thana, and block, the tripod on which rural India rests.From this perspective, Bhagwat’s remark enabled Lalu to remind the electorate about his contributions. He shifted the discourse from jungle raj to reservation, arguing his rule had been criticised only because it had been inimical to the upper caste. The BJP, too, helped impart credibility to his narrative. The more stridently its leaders, including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, portrayed Lalu as the king of jungle raj, the more Lalu’s constituency believed their leader was being unjustly maligned.Perhaps, Modi should have remembered his own experience of Gujarat. He, too, had gained electorally at the time Congress leader Sonia Gandhi called him “maut ka saudagar”. The Bihar election, in this sense, wasn’t just about Bihari versus Bahari (outsider); it was also about our (read: subaltern) leader against theirs (the privileged upper caste).Lalu played the role of subaltern leader deftly. Aware of the deep distrust, even dislike, that the upper caste had for him, and certain he wasn’t to poll their votes to a significant degree, he didn’t feel restrained from polarising the electorate. As Bihar witnessed one round of election after another, his rhetoric against the upper caste became shaper.For instance, he openly insisted it was a battle between the upper caste and the rest, a throwback to the fight he had waged in the 1991 General Election and thereafter. He demanded the RSS burn Guru Golwalkar’s Bunch of Thoughts to prove it did not endorse its ideologue’s advocacy of beating Dalits who have the gumption of entering the Vishwanath Temple in Varanasi.Nitish, too, had been one of the faces of Mandal forces. But he largely eschewed the radical rhetoric of caste because his party needed votes of other social groups to perform well. For one, his own caste of Kurmis is numerically too thin to give him an edge. They are also not spread out across the state. He required to mop up votes of women, EBCs (economically backward castes), and progressive sections of upper caste to perform well in elections. This is why he chose to rely on the development agenda.Unlike him, Lalu’s support base of Yadavs is substantial; their votes along with those of Muslims provide him a lead in many constituencies. Then again, unlike Nitish, his concern was to prevent the BJP from weaning away the Yadavs to its fold, a strategy quite evident from the fact that they were the second biggest recipients of the NDA ticket.It is also true that the Yadavs had been pining to capture power that had alluded them for a decade. This they were not to secure by voting the BJP, which was unlikely to appoint a Yadav or an OBC chief minister. In resorting to caste rhetoric, Lalu ensured his group wasn’t split.Lalu and Nitish complemented each other admirably. Lalu, typically, represented a rustic, fiery, combative leader of subaltern social groups; Nitish symbolised to them a leader who is as sophisticated as any, adept at governance, and who could rise above caste loyalties. Through their individual personalities Lalu and Nitish combined caste pride and primordial sentiments with modern ideas such as aspirations and social mobility.Yet the Grand Alliance wouldn’t have swept Bihar had it not had the organisation of the RJD to depend upon. The JD(U) network is not spread evenly across the state. This is because it had been in alliance with the BJP for good 20 years. It implied that the JD (U) did not fight from constituencies allocated to the BJP. Elections help recruit footsoldiers and local leaders who develop interest in building a party network. By contrast, Lalu’s RJD, even when in alliance, fought from the bulk of constituencies in Bihar. It is the RJD which ensured the Grand Alliance was in fine fettle to neutralise the well-oiled electoral machinery of the Sangh.Then again, Lalu is senior to Nitish, in terms of the percentage of votes his party polled in the Lok Sabha election of last year. Yet he was accommodating of Nitish, not demanding more seats than the JD (U) as he could very well have argued. Nor did he veto the proposal to allocate 40 seats to the Congress even though Rahul Gandhi had previously demonstrated reluctance to share the stage with the RJD chief.True, he was fighting for his political survival, as Nitish too was, yet it is always an art to read the writing on the wall, given the bloated egos that constitute India’s political class.More significantly, Lalu used his inimitable rhetoric to neutralise Modi’s magic. He refused to engage Modi in a serious vein, mimicking and mocking him or offering him gratuitous advise such as not to speak “too loudly lest he burst his vein in the neck”. In a verbal joust, the contender gains when his rival is deprived of gravitas and prestige.Obviously, political pundits will now watch Lalu closely. Will he cooperate with Nitish all the way or will he now, after having staged a comeback, create problems for him? Disqualified from fighting elections and, therefore, also from the post of chief minister, Lalu is cut out to become the architect of the anti-BJP Front, once he is reasonably assured his sons will inherit his political legacy.Ajaz is a journalist from Delhi. His novel, The Hour Before Dawn, published by HarperCollins, is available in bookstores

