RSS mouthpiece Panchjanya’s latest cover story defends the killing of Akhlaq Saifi, 52, in Dadri on the night of September 28 over what was allegedly beef in his refrigerator.RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat. AgenciesThe Indian Express reports that the RSS quotes Vedic texts to defend the shameful and brutal murder of an unarmed Muslim man who had just finished his dinner in a quiet town in Uttar Pradesh. For the record, here are some facts. India is the second largest exporter of beef in the world behind only Brazil and this comes from a crucial ambiguity of what constitutes beef. In most states, buffalo slaughter is legal and beef exports in the first six months of Modi's leadership have actually increased.RSS mouthpiece Panchjanya, in its latest edition, has carried a cover story saying the Vedas order the killing of “sinners” who slaughter cows, says the report.It alleges that madrasas and the Muslim leadership teach Indian Muslims to hate the country’s traditions.“Akhlaq (the Dadri victim) perhaps slaughtered a cow under the influence of such bad deeds,” it states. Questioning the silence of writers, it asks them why they have been quiet on this issue.“Veda ka adesh hai ki gau hatya karne wale pataki ke pran le lo. Hum mein se bahuton ke liye to yah jivan-maran ka prashn hai (Vedas order killing of the sinner who kills a cow. It is a matter of life and death for many of us),” states the article ‘Is Utpat ke Us paar’ (The other side of this disturbance)’ by Hindi writer Tufail Chaturvedi who edits the journal Lafz. Tufail is the name Vinay Krishna Chaturvedi uses.In a Firstpost special on the high ground that Prime Minister Modi must take, R Jagannathan says that given the climate of hostility to his government, it is unlikely that Modi’s critics will accept “facts”. Moreover, as Prime Minister, he should be taking the higher moral ground, and, if possible, also fling the gauntlet to his opponents. Here is what Modi should be saying in his next Mann ki Baat, or, for that matter, his next “bhaiyon aur behenon” speech to the nation."I have been saddened by the rise of intolerance in this country for a long time, and recent incidents in Dadri and some earlier killings of people who spoke against blind faith are simply unacceptable. I condemn all violence and intolerance of any kind. I am equally pained by the decisions of some writers to return their Sahitya Akademi awards. While I do not accept their claim that intolerance in a recent phenomenon, I accept their feelings as genuine and many of those returning their awards are doing so for non-political reasons as well.I would like to take this opportunity to assert my full backing for free speech and against attempts to impose one segment's views on another. As for violence, there is simply no place for it in India. I urge state governments to act proactively to prevent violence of any kind.Read the Express story here.Read the Firstpost special here. 

