<comment>This not good when you tell lie</comment>

<comment>Okay tell what you know</comment>

<comment>I have heard Khattar's audio. The media has again done a hit job by twisting what he said. Saying 'रहें' he meant 'remain' and not 'stay'. Translating his statement it meant that Muslims can 'remain' Muslims by not eating beef and not that they can 'stay' only if they don't eat beef. Media is really playing dirty. This is how they playing to a definite plan which smacks of some hidden hand. I would sincerely wish Modi govt does something about this mischief. It is getting out of hand now.</comment>

<comment>Why this English Journalists having the poor knowledge of Hindi are taking interviews with politicians? This is the case with many other languages.Many such incidences of "twisting of meaning" we  are coming across frequently. This is a sort of war that is going on between media and politicians.This situation must end.It gives an impression that media wants to manufacture news with different meanings because of language understanding barrier.This deeply makes the society disturbed.</comment>

<comment>BJP leaders are destroying their credibility everyday, that from PM down to low BJP worker, nobody believes a word they say. They are quoted something controversial, and then they deny it. In this case, no body doubts that the CM has made controversial statement against Muslims. </comment>

<comment>Ooooooo</comment>

<comment>Hindus se request hai please reservation par ban lagao kyuki hamare bachho ka future sankat mein jaa raha hai.</comment>

<comment>Dimaag ki dahi kabhi reservation par bhi debate kiya karo aur reservation ko ban karne ki soocho. </comment>

<comment>540 comments done but none is bothered about reservation in government jobs and college admissions which SC, ST, OBC and dalits gets. They take reservations benefits.wow is happening in India.</comment>

<comment>Four more years left for bjpee..31% people also fed up now...Rip communalism </comment>

<comment>Muslims are really cruel human beings to kill innocent, harmless and beautiful cows</comment>

<comment>Yaa but I knew how we beat and hit Bihar people in Mumbai. The auto drivers . </comment>

<comment>But yaa i agree cows should not be killed . By anybody and by any religion.</comment>

<comment>Why dont muslims eat chicken, eggs, pork instead? Beef is red meat, full of cholesterol and bad for health. Khattarji is right. Sickulars dont have the brains to understand his point of view</comment>

<comment>Just in Hatred for Muslims do not disown your own Hindu Scriptures where beef eating is so common , as Regarding Jains , their sentiments are hurt when you sacrifice goat chicken ,then why not ban chicken goat also</comment>

<comment>Just in hatred of Hindus,dont start consuming beef.</comment>

<comment>20 PERCENT OF HINDU POPULATION INCLUDING DALITS CONSUME BEEF ,WHAT SHOULD BE DONE</comment>

<comment>But dalits gets benefit of reservation in jobs and college admissions which also worst happening for years.Reservation should be banned first. Punish people who gets caste reservation benefits.</comment>

<comment>Dalits r hindus n never consume beef n respect the sentiments of 80%..</comment>

<comment>There are two passages in the Satapatha Brahmana which relate to animal sacrifice and beef-eating. One is at 111.1.2.21 and reads as follows:"He (the Adhvaryu) then makes him enter the hall. Let him not eat (the flesh) of either the cow or the ox, for the cow and the ox doubtless support everything here on earth. The gods spoke, ‘verily, the cow and the ox support everything here; come, let us bestow on the cow and the ox whatever vigour belonged to other species (of animals); and therefore the cow and the ox eat most Hence were one to eat (the flesh) of an ox or a cow, there would be, as it were, an eating of everything, or, as it were, a going to the end (or, to destruction)... Let him therefore not eat (the flesh) of the cow and the ox."The other passage is at 1, 2, 3, 6. It speaks against animal sacrifice on ethical grounds. A similar statement is contained in the Apastambha Dharma Sutra at 1, 5, 17, 29. Apastambha lays a general embargo on the eating of cow’s flesh.Such is the evidence in support of the contention that the Hindus never ate beef. What conclusion can be drawn from this evidence?REF :B. R. Ambedkar, ‘Did the Hindus never eat beef?’ in The Untouchables: Who Were They and Why They Became Untouchables? in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches, vol. 7, (Government of Maharashtra, Bombay, 1990, first edition 1948) pp. 323-328.]</comment>

<comment>Quite clearly the above quote refers to a way of life of that period where the cow was required for sustenance. Its now so today so therefore the same cannot be held true today.</comment>

<comment>So u studied in a madarssa,whr u wr taught abv idiocacy by ur mulla guru,a brainwashed arabic cult follower.</comment>

<comment>OPEN YOUR MIND , Whole world consumes beef , forget about madrassa , go to any american european country to find out ,don't behave like lowly person</comment>

<comment>Hv u heard the proverb--"when in rome do as the romens do".</comment>

<comment>Thank you Mr. Khattar for ensuring that Modi loses Bihar Elections!</comment>

<comment>Bihar is not in pakistan ahole.</comment>

<comment>It will become pakistan or worse with morons like kattara</comment>

<comment>Abrahamic cult followers if they want to practice abrahamic culture can then go to thr abrahamic land.Cow is considered sacred by indian majority  n if they insult thr faith n beleif  by killing cow n consuming beef then chances r tht they wll meet the sm fate as dadri mulla.</comment>

<comment>Don't you think Hindu Religion is based on Scriptures , don't think Hindus do not eat beef ,some Muslims also do not eat beef ,it is their own choice as suchThat the Aryans of the Rig Veda did kill cows for purposes of food and ate beef is abundantly clear from the Rig Veda itself. In Rig Veda (X. 86.14) Indra says: ‘They cook for one 15 plus twenty oxen". The Rig Veda (X.91.14) says that for Agni were sacrificed horses, bulls, oxen, barren cows and rams. From the Rig Veda (X.72.6) it appears that the cow was killed with a sword or axe.As to the testimony of the Satapatha Bramhana, can it be said to be conclusive? Obviously, it cannot be. For there are passages in the other Bramhanas which give a different opinion. To give only one instance. Among the Kamyashtis set forth in the Taittiriya Bramhana, not only the sacrifice of oxen and cows is laid down, but we are even told what kind and description of oxen and cows are to be offered to what deities. Thus, a dwarf ox is to be chosen for sacrifice to Vishnu; a drooping horned bull with a blaze on the forehead to Indra as the destroyer of Vritra, a black cow to Pushan, a red cow to Rudra, and so on. The Taittiriya Bramhana notes another sacrifice called Panchasaradiya-seva, the most important element of which was the immolation of seventeen five-year old humpless, dwraf bulls, and as many dwarf heifers under three year old.</comment>

<comment>Since u r no hindu n a madassa product so u dont knw.Majority hindus consider cow as sacred n never consume beef.</comment>

<comment>Justice Katzu a Brahmin said to have taken beef , will you guys kill keralites ASSAMAESE HINDUS WHO EAT BEEF ?</comment>

<comment>Dont talk abt exceptions,i told majority hindus mr than 70%indians in around 80% india dont consume beef.</comment>

<comment>Do. Respect cows please don't kill them Either Hindus , Muslims or any religion in India.</comment>

<comment>i honestly dont understand y v hav to make so much of a fuss abt wat is there on sumbody else's dinner plate...</comment>

<comment>A section of the intelligentsia is crying at the top of their voice how can the State tell us what to eat. I wonder where is this outrage when Government Schools in Malabar region of Kerala stop mid day meal during the month of Ramzan. Leave aside choosing what to eat, children in these schools have no choice as they have nothing served to them.</comment>

<comment>It is too well known to recount that these Hindutva forces confer the status of mother to the cow. Currently 72 communities in Kerala - not all of them untouchables - prefer beef to the expensive mutton and the Hindutva forces are trying to prevail upon them to stop the same.</comment>

<comment>A survey of ancient Indian scriptures, especially the Vedas, shows that amongst the nomadic, pastoral Aryans who settled here, animal sacrifice was a dominant feature till the emergence of settled agriculture. Cattle were the major property during this phase and they offered the same to propitiate the gods. Wealth was equated with the ownership of the cattle.Many gods such as Indra and Agni are described as having special preferences for different types of flesh - Indra had weakness for bull's meat and Agni for bull's and cow's. It is recorded that the Maruts and the Asvins were also offered cows. In the Vedas there is a mention of around 250 animals out of which at least 50 were supposed to be fit for sacrifice and consumption. In the Mahabharata there is a mention of a king named Rantideva who achieved great fame by distributing foodgrains and beef to Brahmins. Taittiriya Brahman categorically tells us: `Verily the cow is food' (atho annam via gauh) and Yajnavalkya's insistence on eating the tender (amsala) flesh of the cow is well known. Even later Brahminical texts provide the evidence for eating beef. Even Manusmriti did not prohibit the consumption of beef.</comment>

<comment>khattar is dishonoring all rishi munis of old who used to relish beef as written in many ancient scriptures</comment>

<comment>Mulla's r disrespecting pedo mohmd by not consuming pork as instructed by him as the most delicious food fr mullas to consume.</comment>

<comment>Badman tera naam ganga jamuna theek nahi lagta jaisi tu baate karta hai</comment>

<comment>Unfortunately people can't even call it a `Happy beef year' or else it would be too offensive to the extremists as well as the secularists alike</comment>

<comment>Sorry for this mistake. Writing</comment>

<comment>2015 will be remembered as "beef year."</comment>

<comment>Ooooo....</comment>

<comment>Oooo.... Acha ji</comment>

<comment>BJP SHOULD IMMEDIATELY DISMISS INSANE & IDIOT CM WHO HAS DAMAGED IMAGE OF BJP IN PUBLIC. A NATIONALIST WILL NEVER APPRECIATE SUCH DIVISIVE STATEMENTS.</comment>

<comment>This appears to be a media propaganda. If he has said that it may be his personal opinion but as CM certainly he will not like to implement it. But why there is a law enacted by the center and many states that killing cows is punishable long back. Many Hindus will also feel the same but when they are posted in official position they will abide by the policies and principles of the government.</comment>

<comment>It may be recalled that Khatter,Chief Minister of Haryana State,has made a "solemn oath" before taking office,that he will bear true and faithful allegiance to  Constitution! of India!Article 15 states: "The State shall not discriminate any  citizen  on grounds only of religion,race, caste,sex,place of birth or any of them"!How,then, has he made this statement against Muslims and their food habits?</comment>

<comment>Quite true, a representative of the government should not manifest any form of any religion in his capacity as the representative of the people. Especially when there are more important issues like education, poverty and housing that are more deserving of his attention.</comment>

<comment>Madrasas teach you to blow yourself up so that you can get 72 whores is well known. And in churches, the Christian priest will ask you to come to pulpit to teach bible and in the name of jesus molest you. Both middle eastern religion only preaches one thing...violence and lust for kids. ---------72 Virgins and BoysMuslims are motivated to terrorism because the Quran tells them that fighting non-believers is a duty of every Muslim and the only way to be certain of going to heaven to enjoy untold sensual pleasures is to die fighting in the cause of Allah.If they can make it to heaven, one of the rewards all Muslims are promised is 72 virgins. The number of virgins is not specified in Quran, it comes from a quotation of Muhammad recorded in one of the lesser known Hadith. ("Hadith" is an Arabic word meaning traditions. After Muhammad's death, several collections of his deeds and sayings were assembled. These collections are called Hadith and form the second most authoritative document is Islam, right after the Quran.)VIRGINS (Houris):Mohammed knew that sex would sell very well among the group of his followers who were motivated to fight battles by the promise of sex slaves and booty. By constantly emphasizing to his followers that they would get untouched virgins in Paradise, Mohammed is clearly expressing his "high" opinion of the institution of marriage and his fairness to women. Once the followers go to heaven, they can conveniently ditch their wives for the fresher and more pleasurable sexual encounters with 'Houris' (beautiful virgins). The poor wives who gave up their virginity for the pleasure of their husbands do not get anything. But wait, Allah is all merciful! He gives the wives the rare honour of watching their husbands deflower those 72 Houris (virgins) and 28 young pre-pubescent boys.The specific Hadith in which the number of virgins is specified is Hadith Al-Tirmidhi in the Book of Sunah (volume IV, chapters on The Features of Paradise as described by the Messenger of Allah, chapter 21, About the Smallest Reward for the People of Paradise. The same hadith is also quoted by Ibn Kathir in his Quranic commentary (Tafsir) of Surah Al-Rahman:"The Prophet Muhammad was heard saying: 'The smallest reward for the people of paradise is an abode where there are 80,000 servants and 72 wives, over which stands a dome decorated with pearls, aquamarine, and ruby, as wide as the distance from Al-Jabiyah [a Damascus suburb] to Sana'a [Yemen]."(QURAN 37:40-4 : "In the Gardens of Paradise, Facing one another on thrones, Round them will be passed a cup of pure wine; White, delicious to the drinkers, Neither they will have any kind of hurt, abdominal pain, headache, or sin, nor will they suffer intoxication from it. And with them will be chaste females, restraining their glances, with wide and beautiful eyes."(QURAN 44:51-55): "Verily! The righteous will be in Paradise. Among Gardens and Springs; Dressed in fine silk and also in thick silk, facing each other, and We shall marry them to Houris with wide, lovely eyes."(QURAN 52: 17-20): "Verily, for those who fear Allah there will be Gardens in Paradise, filled with Delight. Enjoying in that which their Lord has bestowed on them, and the fact that their Lord saved them from the torment of the blazing Fire. The Lord will say: ‘Eat and drink with happiness because of what you used to do’. They will recline with ease on thrones arranged in ranks. And We shall marry them to Houris with wide lovely eyes."(QURAN 55:54-59): "Reclining upon the couches lined with silk brocade, and the fruits of the Gardens will be near at hand. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Wherein will be those houris, restraining their glances upon their husbands, whom no man or jinn has opened their hymens with sexual intercourse before. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? In beauty they are like rubies and coral. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny?"(QURAN 55:70-77): "Therein gardens will be fair wives good and beautiful; Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Houris restrained in pavilions; Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Whom no man has opened their hymens with sexual intercourse before. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Reclining on green cushions and rich beautiful mattresses. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny?"(QURAN 56:37-40): "...We created the houris and made them virgins, loving companions for those on the right hand…."(QURAN 78:31-34): "As for the righteous, they shall surely triumph. Theirs shall be gardens and vineyards, and high-bosomed virgins for companions: a truly overflowing cup."continued......</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Sure...cut and paste facts. So when do I see you blowing yourself up?</comment>

<comment>Desperate bhakt spotted.Just look at the history, copy pasting same stuff everywhere. Lots of free time, eh kid?Time to report user. yawn.</comment>

<comment>Despo mulla n wannabe terrorist spotted.</comment>

<comment>plzzz read more quran..i like it that u read so much of quran..plzzz try to read it full..if u want i will send u the translation in the language of ur choice.</comment>

<comment>i think u have forgot ....ajanta alora caves...kamasutra is no muslim culture......plzz acquire some knowledge.</comment>

<comment>What has this to do with Ajanta Alora Caves. Do the caves teach you to blow yourself up so that you can get 72 sensual gorgeous big bloossomed virgins in hell? Is this what your mullah taught you in madrasas? I read Koran and what part of Koran do you want to debate with me? 64% of Koran talks about violence and killing others. People who read koran and follow Islam are responsibile for 99.9999% of terrorism in the world. What part of Koran do you want to bring up here? Does not matter what language you read Koran in, it only tells you one thing. Become a terrorist.</comment>

<comment>Boss muslims are 1.5 billion in the world who believe qur'an as the way of their lives....if 64% quran teaches violence and followers are 99.99% terrorist then nobody will remain alive in this world....talk logic my friend ..dont just get angry and frustrated by what these fool politician are preaching...they want to create a civil war for their vested interest..they want to make india a place like syria and iraq....be wise and spread and talk harmony....live and let live...this is what ur religion is all about.</comment>

<comment>Do you know that it is the Hindu majority that has been magnanimous and allowed muslim Presidents, VP, Chief of Army, CBI chief, CEC, CJI of SC, Bollywood Top stars, richest men, etc. etc. Show me the same in Pakistan? WHY NOT? Show me the same in Bangladesh. WHY NOT? Is it because they are muslims? You cannot have cake and eat it too.</comment>

<comment>Thank you Sir for trying to be logical. But, my comments are based on facts. You are right there are about 1.2 - 1.5 B muslims worldwide. I will post 64% of the Koran that teaches violence here if you want. But, as long as you accept that it is just a book and you can be a better human being you can throw away Koran and still be a good muslim. Now, I said 99.999% of terrorists which means 99.999% of terrorism today worldwide is done by muslim terrorists. So this does not mean all muslims are terrorists but what can I say...you are the first muslim here who is at least ready to logically talk. Else the moment you talk to a muslim he is ready to blow himself and you thinking that he will get 72 virgins and you will get none. I am not angry at all...in fact, I am happy that out of billions of muslim you might be the first one I have come across who is ready to accept some facts and ready to debate with decency. Look from a Hindu or Buddhist or Jain or Sikh or Atheist or Leftist or whatever they are perspective. They all fought independence with muslims and only muslim brothers wanted to separate. So far ok...since if muslims say they cannot stay with Hindu majority that's their choice. No one can question it. But, then the biggest question is how come muslims stayed in India even after getting their own land. In independent India only 4% of the population were muslims. Today 20%. it has grown into. HOW? The fear of a Hindu will never go away since they got burnt once that muslims as soon as they grow they will demand their own land. History is the proof. Also, Hindus were magnanimous and gave 1/3rd of land to 1/10th the population. Now you tell me. Lost land to muslim brothers disproportionately. Then these left over muslims who grew from 4% to 20% today are again becoming violent. People like Owaisi and Azam Khan are spitting venom on a daily basis. Muslims are pampered in India. No Hindu or Buddhist or Christian or Jain or Sikh gets subsidy to go to their holyland. But, muslims are given subsidy to fly Saudia to mecca every year in 20,000 crores or more every year which can wipe out some poverty from India. WHY special laws for muslims? WHY pampering of muslims? Do you know that if a Hindu or a Christian or a Jain or a Sikh or a Buddhist man is caught having multiple wives he goes to jail. If a muslim man is caught in Secular India, he can have multiple wives. Now how is this secular? How is it secular that a muslim from J&K can buy land anywhere in India but a Hindu or a Sikh or a Christian or a Buddhist or a whatever from other parts of India cannot buy land in J&K. Is that secular India? How is it possible that one day ...I repeat one day Hindus cannot celebrate Deepavali with peace...you have to stop fire crackers after 10pm. But, muslims are allowed in secular India to scream through loudspeakers 5 times a day, 365 days a year for past 70 years in a foreign language Arabic (not even Indian language) even if the next door is a hospital or a school or sick people in secular India. WHY? Is Allah deaf and can only hear Arabic through loudspeakers? How long do you think muslims can be pampered in Secular India and Hindus should shut up and bear the grunt after loosing land to Pakistan (they were muslim brothers before independence and then divide). And if you read reports, in 1947 24% of Pakistan was Hindu. How is it possible that today less than 2% of the Pakistani population is Hindus. In 1947, 45% of Bangladesh was Hindu. Today less than 7%. How long do you think Hindus will stay quiet. In 1947, only minuscule population was Christian. In fact, it was so small that Gandhiji set aside few seats in Parliament for Anglo Indian Christians thinking they need representation. Today, 3% officially and unofficially using brutal money power Christians have converted Hindus into Christians. That is 300% growth. So my friend it is not the fault of politicians. They have in the name of Secularism pampered muslims and allowed Christians a free reign. It is now high time Indians are treated as one and no more pampering of Muslims or Christians. Jai Hind.</comment>

<comment>Eternal erection and virginityModern apologists of Islam try to downplay the evident materialism and sexual implications of such descriptions, but, as the Encyclopaedia of Islam says, even orthodox Muslim theologians such as al Ghazali (died 1111 AD) and Al-Ash'ari (died 935 AD) have "admitted sensual pleasures into paradise". The sensual pleasures are graphically elaborated by Al-Suyuti (died 1505 AD), Quranic commentator and polymath. He wrote: "Each time we sleep with a houri we find her virgin. Besides, the penis of the Elected never softens. The erection is eternal; the sensation that you feel each time you make love is utterly delicious and out of this world and were you to experience it in this world you would faint. Each chosen one [ie Muslim] will marry seventy [sic] houris, besides the women he married on earth, and all will have appetising vaginas."BOYS.Homosexuality was and is widely practised in Islamic countries. To please the homosexuals among his followers he promised them pre-pubescent boys in Paradise. So after committing plunder, loot, rape and murder in this life, the followers of Islam get "rewarded" by untouched virginal youths who are fresh like pearls.(QURAN 52:24): "And there will go round boy-servants of theirs, to serve them as if they were preserved pearls."(QURAN 56:17): "They will be served by immortal boys."(QURAN 76:19): "And round about them will (serve) boys of everlasting youth. If you see them, you would think them scattered pearls."One of the reasons Nietzsche hated Christianity was that it "made something unclean out of sexuality", whereas Islam, many would argue, was sex-positive. One cannot imagine any of the Church fathers writing ecstatically of heavenly sex as al-Suyuti did, with the possible exception of St Augustine before his conversion.In our Western world where many scientist purportedly believe in Evolution when in fact they do not inside, it is reported that when confronted with a question on this dichotomy of mind, their usual answer is: "I must believe in Evolution and reject Christianity for Christianity limits my sex life".It seems then that this promise of sensual happiness and sexual bliss in paradise, not only is the motivator for the Islamic terrorists but it may even be a motivator for our secular evolutionists to join the rank of Islam.</comment>

<comment>MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>Pakistani Toh Baap ko Baap nahi Maantey toh fir Madad Fauzia ki kya manenge????</comment>

<comment>Here are the facts:Worldwide:Sunni Muslim terrorists committed more than 70% (8,886) of the 12,533 terrorist murders in 2011. Note that the figure of 8,886 only covers the deaths caused by Sunni (i.e. orthodox) Muslim terrorists. Therefore, considering that the total figure includes deaths caused by Shi'ite Muslim terrorists, The Religion Of Peace's count of 9,015 dead bodies in 2011 is very conservative.“Sunni extremists accounted for the greatest number of terrorist attacks and fatalities for the third consecutive year,” the report says. “More than 5,700 incidents were attributed to Sunni extremists, accounting for nearly 56 percent of all attacks and about 70 percent of all fatalities.”The report says that in 2011, a total of 10,283 terrorism attacks across the world killed 12,533 people. Terrorism also is blamed for 25,903 injuries and 5,554 kidnappings.According to NCTC, of the 12,533 terrorism-related deaths worldwide, 8,886 were perpetrated by “Sunni extremists,” 1,926 by “secular/political/anarchist/Shia/Khurdish” groups, and only 77 by “Neo-Nazi/Fascist/White Supremacist” groups.The report showed that the number of terrorism-related fatalities “decreased by 5 percent” from 13,193 in 2010 to 12,533 in 2011, while the number of attacks dropped 12 percent from 11,641 in 2010 to 10,283 last year.“More than half [6,418] of the people killed in 2011 were civilians and 755 were children,” the report noted.Countries with Muslim majorities such as Afghanistan “suffered the largest number of fatalities overall (in 2011) with 3,245 deaths, followed by Iraqis (2,958), Pakistanis (2,038), Somalis (1,013), and Nigerians (590).”Al-Qaida (AQ) and its affiliates, considered to be Sunni extremists, were “responsible for at least 688 attacks that resulted in almost 2,000 deaths,” the report showed.The Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan, also comprised of Sunni extremists, “conducted over 800 attacks that resulted in nearly 1,900 deaths,” NCTC said.More than 95 percent of all suicide bombing attacks conducted worldwide are carried out by Muslim extremists.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>100% full marks.each and every statement is correct. For grammer teacher must be punished.</comment>

<comment>Here are the facts:More than 95 percent of all suicide bombing attacks conducted worldwide are carried out by Muslim extremists.Worldwide:Sunni Muslim terrorists committed more than 70% (8,886) of the 12,533 terrorist murders in 2011. Note that the figure of 8,886 only covers the deaths caused by Sunni (i.e. orthodox) Muslim terrorists. Therefore, considering that the total figure includes deaths caused by Shi'ite Muslim terrorists, The Religion Of Peace's count of 9,015 dead bodies in 2011 is very conservative.“Sunni extremists accounted for the greatest number of terrorist attacks and fatalities for the third consecutive year,” the report says. “More than 5,700 incidents were attributed to Sunni extremists, accounting for nearly 56 percent of all attacks and about 70 percent of all fatalities.”The report says that in 2011, a total of 10,283 terrorism attacks across the world killed 12,533 people. Terrorism also is blamed for 25,903 injuries and 5,554 kidnappings.According to NCTC, of the 12,533 terrorism-related deaths worldwide, 8,886 were perpetrated by “Sunni extremists,” 1,926 by “secular/political/anarchist/Shia/Khurdish” groups, and only 77 by “Neo-Nazi/Fascist/White Supremacist” groups.The report showed that the number of terrorism-related fatalities “decreased by 5 percent” from 13,193 in 2010 to 12,533 in 2011, while the number of attacks dropped 12 percent from 11,641 in 2010 to 10,283 last year.“More than half [6,418] of the people killed in 2011 were civilians and 755 were children,” the report noted.Countries with Muslim majorities such as Afghanistan “suffered the largest number of fatalities overall (in 2011) with 3,245 deaths, followed by Iraqis (2,958), Pakistanis (2,038), Somalis (1,013), and Nigerians (590).”Al-Qaida (AQ) and its affiliates, considered to be Sunni extremists, were “responsible for at least 688 attacks that resulted in almost 2,000 deaths,” the report showed.The Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan, also comprised of Sunni extremists, “conducted over 800 attacks that resulted in nearly 1,900 deaths,” NCTC said.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>One gets what he deserves</comment>

<comment>You cannot just find faults with others to justify your terrorist activities by Muslims. When will you stand up and learn to accept the facts that Islam teaches terrorism.MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>How are "Sunni" terrorist groups different from "Shia" extremists?Thamir AlHejailanAll shiite terrorist groups I can think of at least in the past 35 years have  pledged allegiance to Khomeini. They have one central authority they are ALL loyal to. Secondly, there is NO international Shiite terrorist group. All Shiite terrorist groups have regional ambitions that don't go beyond the theater of battle they are fighting in. Thirdly, all Shiite terrorist groups don't try to provoke problems with their Sunni neighbours for obvious pragmatic reasons (only 10% of Muslims are Twelver Shiites) despite secretly despising them and subversively working to convert Sunnis to Shiism.Sunni groups have no central authority they all report to. Even bin laden at his height had multiple partners who were killed (like Abdullah Azzam) or sidelined (Zawahiri). Not to mention multiple branches of Al-Qaeda refused his direct orders like Zarqawi in Iraq(which later  became ISIS). Their success frankly comes from their superior financing skills largely through extortion and the heroin trade (also an unknown amount from wealthy donors in the gulf)</comment>

<comment>4 Sunni Muslim Groups Responsible for 66% of All 17,958 Terror Killings in 2013By Patrick Goodenough | November 19, 2014 | 4:38 AM EST– The number of people killed by terrorists worldwide in 2013 rose by 60 percent compared to the previous year – from 11,133 to 17,958 – with four Sunni Muslim extremist groups responsible for two-thirds of all fatalities, according to a comprehensive annual study.Eighty-two percent of fatalities occurred in just five countries – Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria and Syria, although the number of countries that experienced more than 50 terror-related deaths also rose – to 24, compared with 15 the previous year.The report also found that Islam as a “religion” as a driving ideology for terrorism has jumped significantly in the last five years, and accounts for most of the terror activity in the Middle East and North Africa, South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa.As a driver for terrorist groups, muslim religion far outstrips “politics,” "Over the last decade the increase in terrorism has been linked to radical Islamic groups whose violent theologies have been broadly taught,” said Steve Killelea, executive chairman of the Institute for Economics and Peace.“To counteract these influences, moderate forms of Sunni theologies need to be championed by Sunni Muslim nations,” he said. “Given the theological nature of the problem it is difficult for outside actors to be influential.”Four Sunni groups were responsible for 66 percent of all terror fatalities in 2013. In order of deadliness, they were the Taliban in Afghanistan and its Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) affiliate in neighboring Pakistan; al-Qaeda and its various affiliates; ISIS and its al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) precursor; and Boko Haram in Nigeria.Muslim Religion as a driving ideology for terrorism has dramatically increased since 2000. As expected, Iraq tops the new Global Terrorism Index (GTI), accounting for by far the largest number of terrorist deaths in the period under review – and that was even before the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)’s surge in the country, which has escalated since last January.Iraq recorded a 162 percent rise in fatalities, to 6,362, with ISIS responsible for 77 percent of the attacks that were claimed by any particular group.Next up was Afghanistan, which recorded a 13 percent rise in terror fatalities in 2013, to 3,111. Of those, 75 percent were attributed to the Taliban, which killed almost 2,350 people in 2013.In Pakistan, number three on the GTI, 2,345 people were killed in terror attacks in 2013, an increase of 37 percent. Many of the attacks were not claimed, but the TTP took responsibility for 49 percent of those that were claimed, accounting for almost 25 percent of fatalities.Nigeria at number four saw 1,826 people killed. Seven groups claimed responsibility, but the vast majority of attacks were carried out by Boko Haram, which the report says is “one of the most deadly terrorist groups in the world with an average of close to eight deaths per terrorist attack.”The descent of Africa’s most populous country has been especially marked over recent years. As a result of Boko Haram’s deadly campaign, Nigeria climbed to fourth place in this year’s GTI from seventh place in last year’s report and 12th the year before.Syria is fifth on the new GTI, with 1,078 people killed in terror attack over the period in review, a jump from around 600 deaths the previous year. (The report differentiates between fatalities in terror attacks and “conventional warfare” deaths in the brutal civil war, but says the number of terror attacks may be underreported due to the conflict.)Half of the terror attacks in Syria in 2013 were not claimed, but the al-Qaeda affiliate al-Nusra Front was responsible for more than 40 percent.Rounding out the top 10 on the GTI were Somalia, India, the Philippines, Yemen and Thailand.</comment>

<comment>ALL OVER THE WORLD THERE ARE VARIOUS LAWS AGAINST WHAT MEAT CAN YOU EAT OR CANNOT EAT. EVEN IN CHINA THE COUNTRY WHERE NO MEAT IS SPARED HAS LAWS AGAINST SOME MEAT. INDIA SHOULD BE AT LIBERTY TO PASS LAWS TOO THAT SAYS ONE CANNOT EAT BEEF AND SO BE IT.China Outlaws the Eating of Tiger Penis, Rhino Horn, and Other Animal Products By Kayla RubleMay 2, 2014 | 12:20 pmConsumers of some animal products in China face a risk of considerable jail time after the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress reinterpreted existing criminal laws last week to put greater pressure on those who eat or purchase these species.Chinese law makes it illegal to hunt and buy any of the country's 420 protected species, which include Asiatic black bears, South China tigers, golden monkeys, and giant pandas.The change adopted by the Standing Committee redefines what it means to purchase these species, making it illegal for anyone to knowingly buy or consume animals that were poached. The aim of the law is to crack down on the demand for these species, which are widely used in traditional Chinese medicine. Various animal parts are thought to offer assorted health benefits, like preventing cancer or relieving back pain.Many of these species are also valued as a mark of status. Consumption has boomed in tandem with the country's economy, and the demand has encouraged large-scale illegal hunting.'Rhino horn and deer musk can be more valuable than gold or cocaine.'While activists would prefer the language of the protection statute to be strengthened, they welcome the new interpretation."This is very good in its own way," Grace Gabriel, the Asia director at the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), told VICE News. "This interpretation is finally making it illegal to knowingly consume these species and their products."Profits for these species and their body parts are sky-high. Ivory can go for $1,000 a pound on the streets of Beijing, and the pangolin — an anteater whose scales are used to disperse blood stasis and promote pus discharge, and whose meat is considered a delicacy — can fetch up to $324 a dish at local restaurants. A report published in March noted that the pangolin is the world's most heavily trafficked animal.According to the IFAW report, rhino horn and deer musk can be more valuable than gold or cocaine. A single gland from Asia's musk deer can fetch upwards of $250. The musk is used for cardiac, circulatory, and respiratory problems.The belief that consuming certain animals enables the absorption of their attributes has endured throughout Chinese history.Nearly every part of a tiger's body is believed to offer some sort of health benefit. Its blood is thought to build willpower, and its bones are said to have an anti-inflammatory effect capable of treating arthritis, headaches, and all manner of swelling. Its eyeballs are used to ease epilepsy, malaria, and cataracts. The tiger's penis is particularly prized as an aphrodisiac, and is commonly prepared by soaking the dried member in water and then simmering it with herbal ingredients.Virtually nothing is spared: tiger fecal matter is regarded as a remedy for hemorrhoids and alcoholism.But the tiger is merely one prominent example. Bile from Asiatic black bears is used to treat liver ailments, tapeworm, and colds, among other maladies. The bile is gathered through a painful and inhumane extraction process; the bear is tightly confined in a "crush cage" as a catheter implanted in its gall bladder drains the bile out. Thousands of bears are kept in bile farms across China. Most of them are Asiatic black bears that were illegally caught as cubs. Animal rights activists have long railed against this cruel enterprise, which persists despite the special safe status of the bears."A lot of the consumers don't realize what they did was wrong," Gabriel said. "They say, 'If I didn't kill it, if it's on the market, then what's wrong with me buying it?' There's no stigma attached with wildlife consumption."Demand in China is increasingly driven by affluence."Wealth-driven demand is going up," Gabriel noted. "It's not replacing health-driven consumption, but is certainly overtaking it."In March, suspected gang members were arrested in the southern Guangdong province for operating a criminal ring that bought and slaughtered tigers. The meat and other products were sold to wealthy people and government officials. The act of slaughtering the animals has become a sport, with wealthy customers eager to observe the killings.</comment>

<comment>..here are some of the Prohibited foods all over the world that our Indian media will never bring or talk about and we Indians will think food is not prohibited anywhere in the world. Indian media = full of lies.Amphibians and reptilesJudaism strictly forbids the consumption of amphibians, such as frogs. Consumption of reptiles, such as crocodiles and snakes, is also forbidden. In other cultures, foods such as frog legs and alligator are treasured as delicacies, and the animals are raised commercially.BatsIn Judaism, the Deuteronomic Code and Priestly Code explicitly prohibit the bat.Likewise, Islamic Sharia forbids their consumption. (However, in the predominantly Muslim nation of Indonesia, bat meat is known to be a prized delicacy, especially within the Batak andMinahasa minority communities, both of which are largely non-Muslim.BearsBears are not considered kosher animals in Judaism. Observant Jews therefore abstain from eating bear meat.All predatory terrestrial animals are forbidden in Islam.BirdsThe Torah (Leviticus 11:13) explicitly states that the eagle, vulture, and osprey are not to be eaten. A bird now commonly raised for meat in some areas, the ostrich, is explicitly banned as food in some versions of Leviticus 11:16.In contrast Islamic dietary rules cite the ostrich is permissible to consume, and birds of prey (those who hunt with claws and talons) are forbidden.In North America, while pigeons (as doves), sometimes known as squab, are a hunted game bird, urban pigeons are avoided due to the presumption of uncleanness and the parasites which they may carry. Swan was at one time a dish reserved for royalty.Scavengers and carrion-eaters such as vultures and crows are avoided as food in many cultures because they are perceived as carriers of disease and unclean, and associated with death. An exception is the rook which was a recognized country dish, and which has in more recent times been served in a Scottish restaurant in London. In Western cultures today, most people regard songbirds as backyard wildlife rather than as food.CamelsDromedary camelThe eating of camels is strictly prohibited by the Torah in Deuteronomy 14:7 and Leviticus 11:4. The Torah considers the camel unclean because even though it chews the cud, or regurgitates, the way bovines, sheep, goats, deer, antelope, and giraffes (all of which are kosher) do, it does not meet the cloven hoof criterion. Like these animals, camels (and llamas) are ruminants with a multi-chambered stomach. Camels and llamas are tylopods and have a three-chambered stomach, while these other species are true ruminantians, with a four-chambered stomach. Like the aforementioned ungulates, camels are even-toed ungulates, with feet split in two. However, unlike them, camels' feet form not hard hooves but rather soft pads.In Islam, the eating of camel is allowed, and is indeed traditional in the Islamic heartland in Saudi Arabia and the Arabian Peninsula more generally.CatsThere is a strong taboo against eating cats in many Western parts of the world, including most of the Americas and Europe. Cat meat is forbidden by Jewish and Islamic law as both religions forbid the eating of carnivores. Cat meat is eaten as part of uncommon cuisines of China, Vietnam and Switzerland. Cats are commonly regarded as pets in Western countries, or as working animals, kept to control vermin, not as a food animal, and consumption of cats is thus seen as a barbaric act by a large part of the population in those countries. Cat meat was eaten, for example, during the famine in the Siege of Leningrad. In 1996, a place that served cat meat was supposedly discovered by the Argentine press in a shanty town in Rosario, but in fact the meal had been set up by media from Buenos Aires.In 2008, it was reported that cats were a staple part of the local diet in Guangdong, China, with many cats being shipped down from the north and one Guangzhou-based business receiving up to 10,000 cats per day from different parts of China.[16] Protesters in other parts of China have urged the Guangdong provincial government to crack down on cat traders and restaurants that serve cat meat.The term "roof-hare" (roof-rabbit, German Dachhase) applies to cat meat presented as that of a hare, another small mammal used as a source of meat. Subtracting the skin, feet, head and tail, hare and cat carcasses appear similar. The only way to distinguish them is by looking at the processus hamatus of the feline scapula, which should have aprocessus suprahamatus.[clarification needed] Dar gato por liebre ("to pass off a cat as a hare") is an expression common to many Spanish-speaking countries, equivalent to "to pull the wool over someone's eyes" derived from this basic scam. There is an equivalent Portuguese expression Comprar gato por lebre, meaning "to buy a cat as a hare". The expression churrasco de gato ("cat barbecue") is largely used in Brazil with a humorous note, especially for roadside stands that offer grilled meat on a stick (often coated withfarofa), due to their poor hygiene and that the source of the meat is mostly unknown. Also, in the Philippines, there is an urban legend and a joke that the some vendors use cat meat to make siopao (steamed bun), leading some Filipinos to name their pet cats "Siopao". Meanwhile, "kitten cakes" and "buy three shawarma - assemble a kitten" are common Russian urban jokes about the suspect origin of food from street vendors' stalls. In English, the common expression refers to what the victim of the trick thinks is happening: "Buy a pig in a poke."The inhabitants of Vicenza in northern Italy are reputed to eat cats, although the practice has been out of use for decades.[18] In February 2010, a popular Italian gastronome was criticized and suspended from a show for talking about the former practice of eating cat stew in Tuscany.During the so-called "Bad Times" of hunger in Europe during and after World War I and World War II "roof-rabbit" was a common food.[20] Those who thought that they were eating Australian rabbits[21] were really eating European cats.Some restaurants in the Hai Phong and Hạ Long Bay area in north Vietnam advertise cat meat hot pot as "little tiger", and cats in cages can be seen inside.</comment>

<comment>I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.We are thankful to Hindus that in spite of our own Owaisi can spread hatred, our own muslim Azam Khan can spread hatred, we can through media spread hatred against Hindus.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we being fundamentalist and we as Sunni kill all others including muslims like Shia we are one when it comes to spreading terrorism against other religions like Hinduism or Christianity.</comment>

<comment>I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>i am muslim but hide in hindu name and declared to that that i eat beef so all dumb hindu can think that hindu can also eat beef. its time people should avoid such kind of advertisement.</comment>

<comment>You can enjoy pigshit as desert , no objection.We will not advertise it.One Bollywood shabana husband vomitted few days ago...no body should object whatever is done inside of ones home......it may be eating shit , making bomb , communication with enemy country   , etc,etc '' Why bollywood idiots spit venom in politics is surprize.</comment>

<comment>Do you also eat pork? Horse meat? Dog meat? Cat meat? Do you eat humans as humans used to be carnivorous long time ago. And did your mullah tell you to blow yourself so that you can get 72 virgins?</comment>

<comment>Indian media is spreading hatred and terrorism since they have the freedom to write anything they are writing rubbish and lies and spreading terror by the use of pen. Indian media says no food is banned anywhere in the world and so why should India ban beef. Indians can eat whatever they want. Really? Even in US things are banned. Can you believe pasteurized milk is illegal in America. Milk? So India can ban BEEF if it wants to...it is the prerogative of the Indian government.Are There Any Foods That Are Illegal To Eat in the United States?Some foods that are considered common fare or rare delicacies in other countries are actually banned in the United States. This could be because of safety concerns, issues over the treatment of animals, environmental impact, or a number of other considerations. Whatever the case, these foods are banned in the USA:AbsintheOnce completely banned in the U.S., Absinthe has recently been made legal again as of 1997, but only under very strict controls by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).AckeeAckee is a fruit, and is in fact the national fruit of Jamaica. Importation of the raw fruit is banned in the U.S.Casu Marzu Casu marzu is a traditional Sardinian cheese. It develops when the larvae of a particular fly are introduced into Pecorino to promote fermentation. As the larvae hatch, they eat through the cheese and it softens. The cheese is supposed to be eaten before the maggots die. Add to this wriggly feast the fact that the cheese is unpasteurized, and it was destined to be banned in the U.S.Chilean Sea BassThe U.S. is not alone in banning the Chilean sea bass. 24 other countries have banned the fish or strictly regulated it.Foie GrasThis food is quickly becoming a banned food, though the adoption of its banning has only just begun in limited jurisdictions. The city of Chicago, Illinois banned the food from 2006 to 2008 citing concerns over the force-feeing of geese as part of the preparation of the animals. The force-feeing encourages fattening of the animals, but is considered by some to be inhumane. While Chicago ultimately repealed the ban, the State of California implemented a similar ban against force-feeding in 2012.Horse MeatA contentious matter across the U.S., but the slaughter of horses for human consumption is banned. Why? Well, it is mostly because people like horses a lot. Consumption of horse meat by humans used to be commonplace in the U.S., but sentiment began to shift throughout the later part of the 20th century. As a result, in June 2010, Congress voted to extend the Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 to prohibit the slaughter of horses for human consumption.Japanese Puffer FishJapanese puffer fish is a delicacy to fans of sushi, where it is called “fugu,” but it is largely banned in the U.S.MangosteenThe purple mangosteen is a fruit that is much-prized in Thailand. It was once completely banned in the U.S.OrtolanThe ortolan is a tiny bird, prized by French gourmet chefs. It is banned in the U.S. Indeed, even smuggling the bird into the U.S. is a crime.RedfishToday the redfish is banned outright in all U.S. states except Mississippi.Sassafras OilSassafras, once a popular ingredient in teas and root beer, was banned in the 1960's.Shark Fins“Shark finning” is the act of removing the fin of a shark and dumping the animal back into the ocean. It is illegal in U.S. waters.Unpasteurized MilkOnce the only way it came, unpasteurized milk is now banned in 21 states. Of the other states that allow it, some only allow it if bought directly from the farmer in small quantities.Wild Beluga CaviarWild beluga caviar, exotic delicacy famously enjoyed by daring super-spy evildoers, is prohibited in the U.S.</comment>

<comment>.RSS VIOLATES CONSTITUTION EVERYDAY Fundamental Duty is to promote harmony and brotherhood in India and anti indian RSS violates this duty EVERYDAY.</comment>

<comment>You are alive just because of RSS.</comment>

<comment>RSS supported the british against Gandhiji during freedom struggle.RSS ins involved in MOST number of terrorist activities IndiaGo and find out uneducated insecure moron to brainwash with you lies.</comment>

<comment>4 Sunni Muslim Groups Responsible for 66% of All 17,958 Terror Killings in 2013 By Patrick Goodenough | November 19, 2014 | 4:38 AM EST– The number of people killed by terrorists worldwide in 2013 rose by 60 percent compared to the previous year – from 11,133 to 17,958 – with 99.999% committed by Islamic Terrorists and four Sunni Muslim extremist groups responsible for two-thirds of all fatalities, according to a comprehensive annual study.The report also found that Islam as a “religion” as a driving ideology for terrorism has jumped significantly in the last five years, and accounts for most of the terror activity in the Middle East and North Africa, South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa.As a driver for terrorist groups, Islamic religion far outstrips “politics.”</comment>

<comment>Kya ji aap toh support karo  fight kyu kar rage ho. Saari galti toh Indian express ke editors ki hai  Jo yeh bakwass article likha aur beef pe debate karwa kar Maze le rahe hai. Yeh saale editors ki .....</comment>

<comment>Fundamental Duty is to move all muslims back to Pakistan and get all Hindus and Christians from Pakistan to India as per Jinnah's dream.</comment>

<comment>I am a hindu and I eat beef.... Mr. Khattar, where are you gonna send me to...??</comment>

<comment>You can be a hindu and eat beef does not mean that you cannot blow yourself and get 72 whores in hell. So you can visit hell.</comment>

<comment>Those 72s are still hoarded in your family... lemme know when they are in hell... ill go F#ck them and come back to fu@k some more here on earth... and one more thing... make sure you leave your mom here on earth.. i wanna do her after i come back....</comment>

<comment>Mullah to RemoteSniper: Go man blow yourself up and get your 72 whores in hell. Dont worry about coming back...at least go ....so when are you blowing up...so that I can go after your 4 wives and your sisters.</comment>

<comment>hahahaha I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to HIndus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism. We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today. We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan. We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth. We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch. We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India. We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism. We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>ALL OVER THE WORLD THERE ARE VARIOUS LAWS AGAINST WHAT MEAT CAN YOU EAT OR CANNOT EAT. EVEN IN CHINA THE COUNTRY WHERE NO MEAT IS SPARED HAS LAWS AGAINST SOME MEAT. INDIA SHOULD BE AT LIBERTY TO PASS LAWS TOO THAT SAYS ONE CANNOT EAT BEEF AND SO BE IT.CHINA Outlaws the Eating of Tiger Penis, Rhino Horn, and Other Animal Products By Kayla RubleMay 2, 2014 | 12:20 pmConsumers of some animal products in China face a risk of considerable jail time after the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress reinterpreted existing criminal laws last week to put greater pressure on those who eat or purchase these species.Chinese law makes it illegal to hunt and buy any of the country's 420 protected species, which include Asiatic black bears, South China tigers, golden monkeys, and giant pandas.The change adopted by the Standing Committee redefines what it means to purchase these species, making it illegal for anyone to knowingly buy or consume animals that were poached. The aim of the law is to crack down on the demand for these species, which are widely used in traditional Chinese medicine. Various animal parts are thought to offer assorted health benefits, like preventing cancer or relieving back pain.Many of these species are also valued as a mark of status. Consumption has boomed in tandem with the country's economy, and the demand has encouraged large-scale illegal hunting.'Rhino horn and deer musk can be more valuable than gold or cocaine.'While activists would prefer the language of the protection statute to be strengthened, they welcome the new interpretation."This is very good in its own way," Grace Gabriel, the Asia director at the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), told VICE News. "This interpretation is finally making it illegal to knowingly consume these species and their products."Profits for these species and their body parts are sky-high. Ivory can go for $1,000 a pound on the streets of Beijing, and the pangolin — an anteater whose scales are used to disperse blood stasis and promote pus discharge, and whose meat is considered a delicacy — can fetch up to $324 a dish at local restaurants. A report published in March noted that the pangolin is the world's most heavily trafficked animal.According to the IFAW report, rhino horn and deer musk can be more valuable than gold or cocaine. A single gland from Asia's musk deer can fetch upwards of $250. The musk is used for cardiac, circulatory, and respiratory problems.The belief that consuming certain animals enables the absorption of their attributes has endured throughout Chinese history.Nearly every part of a tiger's body is believed to offer some sort of health benefit. Its blood is thought to build willpower, and its bones are said to have an anti-inflammatory effect capable of treating arthritis, headaches, and all manner of swelling. Its eyeballs are used to ease epilepsy, malaria, and cataracts. The tiger's penis is particularly prized as an aphrodisiac, and is commonly prepared by soaking the dried member in water and then simmering it with herbal ingredients.Virtually nothing is spared: tiger fecal matter is regarded as a remedy for hemorrhoids and alcoholism.But the tiger is merely one prominent example. Bile from Asiatic black bears is used to treat liver ailments, tapeworm, and colds, among other maladies. The bile is gathered through a painful and inhumane extraction process; the bear is tightly confined in a "crush cage" as a catheter implanted in its gall bladder drains the bile out. Thousands of bears are kept in bile farms across China. Most of them are Asiatic black bears that were illegally caught as cubs. Animal rights activists have long railed against this cruel enterprise, which persists despite the special safe status of the bears."A lot of the consumers don't realize what they did was wrong," Gabriel said. "They say, 'If I didn't kill it, if it's on the market, then what's wrong with me buying it?' There's no stigma attached with wildlife consumption."Demand in China is increasingly driven by affluence."Wealth-driven demand is going up," Gabriel noted. "It's not replacing health-driven consumption, but is certainly overtaking it."In March, suspected gang members were arrested in the southern Guangdong province for operating a criminal ring that bought and slaughtered tigers. The meat and other products were sold to wealthy people and government officials. The act of slaughtering the animals has become a sport, with wealthy customers eager to observe the killings.</comment>

<comment>Pork Chops</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment></comment>

<comment>What Muslims r doing here 50 Saudi clerics have asked all able bodied Muslims to wage jehad on Russia who are whipping Sunnis.Toot pado Russia pe </comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Stop this Shakha and all that nonsense Barbaric Onion. So did you come here because your mullah told you to blow yourself up to get 72 whores.</comment>

<comment>RSS terrorists are trined at rss shakas to be anti indianwhy are you hiding it?</comment>

<comment>Guess why rss terrorists dont blow themselves up like mulle??Mulle r told they will get 72 virgins waiting for them in heaven afterwards.same thing was told too rss and bhakts and they said....Arre hamara khada hi nahi hota...to 72 virgins mile ya 72 kaale bhusand...same same...lolz</comment>

<comment>4 Sunni Muslim Groups Responsible for 66% of All 17,958 Terror Killings in 2013 By Patrick Goodenough | November 19, 2014 | 4:38 AM EST– The number of people killed by terrorists worldwide in 2013 rose by 60 percent compared to the previous year – from 11,133 to 17,958 – with 99.999% committed by Islamic Terrorists and four Sunni Muslim extremist groups responsible for two-thirds of all fatalities, according to a comprehensive annual study.The report also found that Islam as a “religion” as a driving ideology for terrorism has jumped significantly in the last five years, and accounts for most of the terror activity in the Middle East and North Africa, South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa.As a driver for terrorist groups, Islamic religion far outstrips “politics.” Over the last decade the increase in terrorism has been linked to radical Islamic groups whose violent muslim theologies have been broadly taught,” said Steve Killelea, executive chairman of the Institute for Economics and Peace.“To counteract these influences, moderate forms of Sunni theologies need to be championed by Sunni Muslim nations,” he said. “Given the theological nature of the problem it is difficult for outside actors to be influential.”Four Sunni groups were responsible for 66 percent of all terror fatalities in 2013. In order of deadliness, they were the Taliban in Afghanistan and its Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) affiliate in neighboring Pakistan; al-Qaeda and its various affiliates; ISIS and its al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) precursor; and Boko Haram in Nigeria.</comment>

<comment>I wish RSS terrorists wipe out muslims from India just like Islam is doing all over the world including in India creating all the terrorists. RSS cannot promise 72 whores where as your muslim mullah is saying you blow yourself up Mr. Terrorist and you will get 72 whores in hell. Why are you hiding it that you are a terrorist who has been trained by his mullah to blow yourself one of these days?</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Nice. SO did your Church Padre also brought you 72 kids who he molested?</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>I dont give a fuq about you or your AK.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Allah Oh' Akbar here I come 72 virgins....are you ready?</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>And you are a bad convert.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Hamarey maulvi sahab ney bola, Bacca to hum ko kya dega? Hum ney bola Jaan. Maulvi Sahab ney bola....Very Good...hum tumko 72 virgins degey.</comment>

<comment>khattar saab should send all the hindus of kerala, even RSS chaddis from kerala to pakistan as they eat beef</comment>

<comment>I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>“Over the last decade the increase in terrorism has been linked to radical Islamic groups whose violent theologies have been broadly taught,” said Steve Killelea, executive chairman of the Institute for Economics and Peace.“To counteract these influences, moderate forms of Sunni theologies need to be championed by Sunni Muslim nations,” he said. “Given the theological nature of the problem it is difficult for outside actors to be influential.”Four Sunni groups were responsible for 66 percent of all terror fatalities in 2013. In order of deadliness, they were the Taliban in Afghanistan and its Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) affiliate in neighboring Pakistan; al-Qaeda and its various affiliates; ISIS and its al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) precursor; and Boko Haram in Nigeria.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>There you go blame it on US. Blame it on Hindus. Blame it on Christians. Blame it on Buddhists. Islam is having problems with all but when will you say it is not others fault but it is you muslims who are at fault. You need to convert back to Hinduism and Buddhism and give up terrorism.MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>Aryans means those who came from central AsiaIt's all fake theory proposed by BritishIt is today's Iran and surrounding partsDo Indians look like Iranians, afgans,uzbeks</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>99.999% of muslims are converted from Hindus in India and Pakistan and yet we are thankful to Hindus that we can spit venom and they stay quiet.I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Muslims in Pakistan, Bangladesh are essentially Hindus: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>Yep..I am pissing in the direction of Mecca. No worries. No one is buying my BS you mean to say because they already know that muslims are terrorists?</comment>

<comment>Who cares what they eat</comment>

<comment>.here are some of the Prohibited foods all over the world that our Indian media will never bring or talk about and we Indians will think food is not prohibited anywhere in the world. Indian media = full of lies.Amphibians and reptilesJudaism strictly forbids the consumption of amphibians, such as frogs. Consumption of reptiles, such as crocodiles and snakes, is also forbidden. In other cultures, foods such as frog legs and alligator are treasured as delicacies, and the animals are raised commercially.BatsIn Judaism, the Deuteronomic Code and Priestly Code explicitly prohibit the bat.Likewise, Islamic Sharia forbids their consumption. (However, in the predominantly Muslim nation of Indonesia, bat meat is known to be a prized delicacy, especially within the Batak andMinahasa minority communities, both of which are largely non-Muslim.BearsBears are not considered kosher animals in Judaism. Observant Jews therefore abstain from eating bear meat.All predatory terrestrial animals are forbidden in Islam.BirdsThe Torah (Leviticus 11:13) explicitly states that the eagle, vulture, and osprey are not to be eaten. A bird now commonly raised for meat in some areas, the ostrich, is explicitly banned as food in some versions of Leviticus 11:16.In contrast Islamic dietary rules cite the ostrich is permissible to consume, and birds of prey (those who hunt with claws and talons) are forbidden.In North America, while pigeons (as doves), sometimes known as squab, are a hunted game bird, urban pigeons are avoided due to the presumption of uncleanness and the parasites which they may carry. Swan was at one time a dish reserved for royalty.Scavengers and carrion-eaters such as vultures and crows are avoided as food in many cultures because they are perceived as carriers of disease and unclean, and associated with death. An exception is the rook which was a recognized country dish, and which has in more recent times been served in a Scottish restaurant in London. In Western cultures today, most people regard songbirds as backyard wildlife rather than as food.CamelsDromedary camelThe eating of camels is strictly prohibited by the Torah in Deuteronomy 14:7 and Leviticus 11:4. The Torah considers the camel unclean because even though it chews the cud, or regurgitates, the way bovines, sheep, goats, deer, antelope, and giraffes (all of which are kosher) do, it does not meet the cloven hoof criterion. Like these animals, camels (and llamas) are ruminants with a multi-chambered stomach. Camels and llamas are tylopods and have a three-chambered stomach, while these other species are true ruminantians, with a four-chambered stomach. Like the aforementioned ungulates, camels are even-toed ungulates, with feet split in two. However, unlike them, camels' feet form not hard hooves but rather soft pads.In Islam, the eating of camel is allowed, and is indeed traditional in the Islamic heartland in Saudi Arabia and the Arabian Peninsula more generally.CatsThere is a strong taboo against eating cats in many Western parts of the world, including most of the Americas and Europe. Cat meat is forbidden by Jewish and Islamic law as both religions forbid the eating of carnivores. Cat meat is eaten as part of uncommon cuisines of China, Vietnam and Switzerland. Cats are commonly regarded as pets in Western countries, or as working animals, kept to control vermin, not as a food animal, and consumption of cats is thus seen as a barbaric act by a large part of the population in those countries. Cat meat was eaten, for example, during the famine in the Siege of Leningrad. In 1996, a place that served cat meat was supposedly discovered by the Argentine press in a shanty town in Rosario, but in fact the meal had been set up by media from Buenos Aires.In 2008, it was reported that cats were a staple part of the local diet in Guangdong, China, with many cats being shipped down from the north and one Guangzhou-based business receiving up to 10,000 cats per day from different parts of China.[16] Protesters in other parts of China have urged the Guangdong provincial government to crack down on cat traders and restaurants that serve cat meat.The term "roof-hare" (roof-rabbit, German Dachhase) applies to cat meat presented as that of a hare, another small mammal used as a source of meat. Subtracting the skin, feet, head and tail, hare and cat carcasses appear similar. The only way to distinguish them is by looking at the processus hamatus of the feline scapula, which should have aprocessus suprahamatus.[clarification needed] Dar gato por liebre ("to pass off a cat as a hare") is an expression common to many Spanish-speaking countries, equivalent to "to pull the wool over someone's eyes" derived from this basic scam. There is an equivalent Portuguese expression Comprar gato por lebre, meaning "to buy a cat as a hare". The expression churrasco de gato ("cat barbecue") is largely used in Brazil with a humorous note, especially for roadside stands that offer grilled meat on a stick (often coated withfarofa), due to their poor hygiene and that the source of the meat is mostly unknown. Also, in the Philippines, there is an urban legend and a joke that the some vendors use cat meat to make siopao (steamed bun), leading some Filipinos to name their pet cats "Siopao". Meanwhile, "kitten cakes" and "buy three shawarma - assemble a kitten" are common Russian urban jokes about the suspect origin of food from street vendors' stalls. In English, the common expression refers to what the victim of the trick thinks is happening: "Buy a pig in a poke."The inhabitants of Vicenza in northern Italy are reputed to eat cats, although the practice has been out of use for decades.[18] In February 2010, a popular Italian gastronome was criticized and suspended from a show for talking about the former practice of eating cat stew in Tuscany.During the so-called "Bad Times" of hunger in Europe during and after World War I and World War II "roof-rabbit" was a common food.[20] Those who thought that they were eating Australian rabbits[21] were really eating European cats.Some restaurants in the Hai Phong and Hạ Long Bay area in north Vietnam advertise cat meat hot pot as "little tiger", and cats in cages can be seen inside.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>I said abt napak</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Napak means failed terrorist nation living on alms of aid money</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>That is exactly what muslims are = terrorists.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>So you agree that ALL MUSLIMS ARE TERRORISTS.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Muslims once they renounce Islam and become Hindus or Christians or Buddhists back....they will be much happier and world will get rid of 99.99999% of terrorism as all terrorists are muslims.MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>Very well said. And then on top, the Hindu Sharia adds the soothing balm.It happened because of confusion.It happened because both the communities were responsible.It happened because it was an accident.It happened because there was a misunderstanding.</comment>

<comment>I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>Hindus shld not care for defenders of babur Aurangzeb Cow is associated with our rlgn should try to protect it by not just bring law but also thru promotion of natural farming I'm which Indian cow forms the core partJust can't blame Muslims for thatFarmers who sell these to slaughter shops and. Hindus enaged in this trade shld be taken to task</comment>

<comment>Hindus = Brahmins</comment>

<comment>Terrorists = Muslims. Muslims = ??? Off course Terrorists.</comment>

<comment>HowOther casts even obcs are more Intrested in rlgnU name a cast which is not bond by cow protectionLingayats or veershiawa,vokkaligas,Marathas,reddys,gujjars,yadavs,thakurs</comment>

<comment>I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.99.9999% of terrorists are muslims. Most of the terrorism is done by a sect of Islam called Sunni. But, we are thankful to Indian media that this no one knows and so no Hindu knows that all muslims are terrorists in spite of we all are.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>.here are some of the Prohibited foods all over the world that our Indian media will never bring or talk about and we Indians will think food is not prohibited anywhere in the world. Indian media = full of lies. WHY IS THAT INDIAN MEDIA IS CONTROLLED BY MUSLIMS?Amphibians and reptilesJudaism strictly forbids the consumption of amphibians, such as frogs. Consumption of reptiles, such as crocodiles and snakes, is also forbidden. In other cultures, foods such as frog legs and alligator are treasured as delicacies, and the animals are raised commercially.BatsIn Judaism, the Deuteronomic Code and Priestly Code explicitly prohibit the bat.Likewise, Islamic Sharia forbids their consumption. (However, in the predominantly Muslim nation of Indonesia, bat meat is known to be a prized delicacy, especially within the Batak andMinahasa minority communities, both of which are largely non-Muslim.BearsBears are not considered kosher animals in Judaism. Observant Jews therefore abstain from eating bear meat.All predatory terrestrial animals are forbidden in Islam.BirdsThe Torah (Leviticus 11:13) explicitly states that the eagle, vulture, and osprey are not to be eaten. A bird now commonly raised for meat in some areas, the ostrich, is explicitly banned as food in some versions of Leviticus 11:16.In contrast Islamic dietary rules cite the ostrich is permissible to consume, and birds of prey (those who hunt with claws and talons) are forbidden.In North America, while pigeons (as doves), sometimes known as squab, are a hunted game bird, urban pigeons are avoided due to the presumption of uncleanness and the parasites which they may carry. Swan was at one time a dish reserved for royalty.Scavengers and carrion-eaters such as vultures and crows are avoided as food in many cultures because they are perceived as carriers of disease and unclean, and associated with death. An exception is the rook which was a recognized country dish, and which has in more recent times been served in a Scottish restaurant in London. In Western cultures today, most people regard songbirds as backyard wildlife rather than as food.CamelsDromedary camelThe eating of camels is strictly prohibited by the Torah in Deuteronomy 14:7 and Leviticus 11:4. The Torah considers the camel unclean because even though it chews the cud, or regurgitates, the way bovines, sheep, goats, deer, antelope, and giraffes (all of which are kosher) do, it does not meet the cloven hoof criterion. Like these animals, camels (and llamas) are ruminants with a multi-chambered stomach. Camels and llamas are tylopods and have a three-chambered stomach, while these other species are true ruminantians, with a four-chambered stomach. Like the aforementioned ungulates, camels are even-toed ungulates, with feet split in two. However, unlike them, camels' feet form not hard hooves but rather soft pads.In Islam, the eating of camel is allowed, and is indeed traditional in the Islamic heartland in Saudi Arabia and the Arabian Peninsula more generally.CatsThere is a strong taboo against eating cats in many Western parts of the world, including most of the Americas and Europe. Cat meat is forbidden by Jewish and Islamic law as both religions forbid the eating of carnivores. Cat meat is eaten as part of uncommon cuisines of China, Vietnam and Switzerland. Cats are commonly regarded as pets in Western countries, or as working animals, kept to control vermin, not as a food animal, and consumption of cats is thus seen as a barbaric act by a large part of the population in those countries. Cat meat was eaten, for example, during the famine in the Siege of Leningrad. In 1996, a place that served cat meat was supposedly discovered by the Argentine press in a shanty town in Rosario, but in fact the meal had been set up by media from Buenos Aires.In 2008, it was reported that cats were a staple part of the local diet in Guangdong, China, with many cats being shipped down from the north and one Guangzhou-based business receiving up to 10,000 cats per day from different parts of China.[16] Protesters in other parts of China have urged the Guangdong provincial government to crack down on cat traders and restaurants that serve cat meat.The term "roof-hare" (roof-rabbit, German Dachhase) applies to cat meat presented as that of a hare, another small mammal used as a source of meat. Subtracting the skin, feet, head and tail, hare and cat carcasses appear similar. The only way to distinguish them is by looking at the processus hamatus of the feline scapula, which should have aprocessus suprahamatus.[clarification needed] Dar gato por liebre ("to pass off a cat as a hare") is an expression common to many Spanish-speaking countries, equivalent to "to pull the wool over someone's eyes" derived from this basic scam. There is an equivalent Portuguese expression Comprar gato por lebre, meaning "to buy a cat as a hare". The expression churrasco de gato ("cat barbecue") is largely used in Brazil with a humorous note, especially for roadside stands that offer grilled meat on a stick (often coated withfarofa), due to their poor hygiene and that the source of the meat is mostly unknown. Also, in the Philippines, there is an urban legend and a joke that the some vendors use cat meat to make siopao (steamed bun), leading some Filipinos to name their pet cats "Siopao". Meanwhile, "kitten cakes" and "buy three shawarma - assemble a kitten" are common Russian urban jokes about the suspect origin of food from street vendors' stalls. In English, the common expression refers to what the victim of the trick thinks is happening: "Buy a pig in a poke."The inhabitants of Vicenza in northern Italy are reputed to eat cats, although the practice has been out of use for decades.[18] In February 2010, a popular Italian gastronome was criticized and suspended from a show for talking about the former practice of eating cat stew in Tuscany.During the so-called "Bad Times" of hunger in Europe during and after World War I and World War II "roof-rabbit" was a common food.[20] Those who thought that they were eating Australian rabbits[21] were really eating European cats.Some restaurants in the Hai Phong and Hạ Long Bay area in north Vietnam advertise cat meat hot pot as "little tiger", and cats in cages can be seen inside.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>So you mean to say if everywhere in the world 99.99999 terrorists are muslims, then it is ok to call all muslims terrorists? Apart from India in 60 countries muslims are allowed to have multiple wives. So is it ok to enslave women in the name of Allah? If everywhere muslims butcher people you are telling me that it is ok to butcher muslims in India? What nonsense. 95% of all suicide bombers are muslims. So you are telling me that it is ok to say that Islam says you need to blow yourself up?</comment>

<comment>Sharia paria are all words of barbaric rlgn</comment>

<comment>MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>LOL.</comment>

<comment>Ooooooo..</comment>

<comment>Chatkaa lagaa kyaa?</comment>

<comment>It is not a BJP project. Even Gandhiji  was against beef - did not allow Kasturbaji to consume beef even when Doctor advised to eat. Cong. has started implimenting beef ban but due to lack of guts could not move ahead which is in BJP's cort now.</comment>

<comment>are you crazy</comment>

<comment>Do not hawk lies like the RSS, whose narrative is full of lies, falsehood, untruths, myths and fairy tales.This is what Gandhiji said "I have been long pledged to serve the cow but how can my religion also be the religion of the rest of the Indians? It will mean coercion against those Indians who are not Hindus".</comment>

<comment>I wish Hindus can hawk but they cannot. Instead all of the terrorism and hawking is done by only muslims. Even Christians are now silent. Buddhist cannot hawk. All of you are timid and afraid of Islam. We can go to any extent to kill you.I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.99.9999% of terrorists are muslims. Most of the terrorism is done by a sect of Islam called Sunni. But, we are thankful to Indian media that this no one knows and so no Hindu knows that all muslims are terrorists in spite of we all are.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>Ooooooo....</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>hi lawdekebaal</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>no. but im sure ur :)</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>sorry. im straight :)</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>dream girl</comment>

<comment>There is nothing to blame only Muslims for this..Christians eat more beef than Muslims. They also eat Pork and whatever animals and birds they get.</comment>

<comment>So if Christians eat more beef you need to blame Christians right? So if 99.99999% terrorists are muslims, if 95% of suicide bombers are Muslims does that mean we blame Islam and Muslims for all terrorism?Time to come back to your religion of your ancestors.MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>You eat your wifes dirty asssss...eat it again tonight or she will go elsewhere</comment>

<comment>so?</comment>

<comment>exposing contract is over ?</comment>

<comment>What have you exposed? You eat grass so you want others to eat that too. People like you make conflicts and i bet there r plenty like you. Rss bhakts.</comment>

<comment>I am a muslim and I dont eat beef because I am so thankful to Hindus in allowing me to stay in India in spite of us muslims asking for Pakistan and getting our land in the name of Allah we turned it into Pureland PAKistan for terrorism.99.9999% of terrorists are muslims. Most of the terrorism is done by a sect of Islam called Sunni. But, we are thankful to Indian media that this no one knows and so no Hindu knows that all muslims are terrorists in spite of we all are.We also as muslims have a duty to wipe out minorities so we killed and butchered Hindu and Christian minority in Pakistan and we massacred Hindus from 24% to 2% today.We are also thankful to Hindus in India that they didnt become Hindu India even though they could just like we became Islamic Republic of Army Ruled Pakistan.We are also thankful to Hindus that even though we dont eat pork and banned pork in our muslim countries they cannot even ban beef. We are pampered in India and so thank you Hindus.We are also thankful to Hindus that they allowed us to multiply like pigs from 4% in 1947 to 20% today which is about 500% growth.We are also thankful to Hindus that in spite of we promising to move to Pakistan which is the reason we got our land we stayed here and terrorize all Indians every terror is done by muslims and Hindus just sit there and watch.We are also thankful to HIndus for letting us cheer up Pakistani Cricket team when they win against India.We are also thankful to Hindus for giving us muslim President, muslim VP, muslims Richest people, muslim CBI Chief, muslim Army Chief, muslim CJI of SC, mulsims in all walks of success including giving us total control of Bollywood and smuggling and terrorism while we gave Babaji ka Thulla to Hindus and Christians in Pakistan or Bangladesh.We produce all the terrorists of the world as muslims and we are thankful to Hindus for giving us an opportunity to get 72 whores in hell when ever we want to blow ourselves.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>They flushed themselves out. Must be squirming.</comment>

<comment>Idiots like this will turn out nation into a war zone just for the sake of religion. Innocent people will be killed and govt will wash its hands off. </comment>

<comment>MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>Please help to stop this hot debate</comment>

<comment>Why? Unable to bear the heat!Have chiiled "gau mutra" to cool yourself?</comment>

<comment>Yes yes I am peeing in the direction of Mecca to cool myself.MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Why all abrahamic cult followers r rapists n terrorist??....Is it popad mohmd effect......</comment>

<comment>The.pedophile Rama effect </comment>

<comment>The illegitimate filth of arabic invaders has spoken......bt as usual wrong.</comment>

<comment>I noticed even at a young age that the term ‘Hindu’ doesn’t occur in any religious text. Several scholars have shown how the existing Hindu identity – or at least a significant part of it – draws from the colonial encounter. So, while some groups in India have eaten meat and beef since forever, the values of vegetarianism, non-violence and cow veneration have also been common – and not just in one or two caste groups, either. Despite the practice of sacrificing animals coming down sharply in the past century or so, several Hindus in India and Nepal still practice the rites of Bali, most prominently during the festival of Gadhimai and at the Kamakhya temple in Assam.</comment>

<comment>Time to convert back to Hinduism, Buddhism my muslim brothers and sisters.MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>They have self-appointed themselves to be "guardians" of Hindus. Actually they are guardians of only Hindutvawadis - a very very species from Hindus.</comment>

<comment>Out of the 7 sarsangha chalak, (which for the hoi polia means chief of the sangha), 6 of them have been Brahmins.RSS is the organisation of the Brahmin Hindus, for the Brahmin Hindus and by the Brahmin Hindus.With less than 3% population (and by extension 3% of democratic votes) they are deciding what we, the 97% of Indians will eat, whom we will watch, listen, read.</comment>

<comment>You are right on the dot.</comment>

<comment>There you go. Sunni muslims blaming RSS and others and then they will kill Shia, Ahmediya, Yezdi, Bohri, Aga Khani,MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>Why the invaders didnt tk thr illegitimate children with them?Why they left the left those filthy b@stards here only?</comment>

<comment>Do not be despondent. They will soon come and take you back with them.</comment>

<comment>Answer to abv.....becaz they wanted us to do the dirty work of clensing the country of filthy mullas lk u</comment>

<comment>I did.</comment>

<comment>So, you were working in collaboration with the invaders??" becaz they wanted us"</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>I thought so about Islam too. With 95% of suicide bombers being muslims I thought they will blow themselves out and wipe out Islam. Where are we with it?MUSLIMS IN PAKISTAN, BANGLADESH ARE ESSENTIALLY HINDUS: Pakistani scholar By Tarun Khanna | Last Updated: Wednesday, September 30, 2015 - 21:56New Delhi: A Pakistani woman activist stirred up the hornet's nest when she stated something which has been reiterated by many Indian scholars including BJP's firebrand leader Subramanian Swamy.According to a report in India Tomorrow, Pakistani scholar Fauzia Syed, during a live television debate, said that all Muslims in Pakistan and Bangladesh are essentially Hindus as their ancestors were followers of Hinduism. She also stated that some of them might be Buddhists also.In response to the argument of radical Pakistani Muslim preacher Zaid Hamid, Fauzia said that most of the Pakistani Muslims are in delusion that they are offspring of the invaders who came attacking the sub-continent from Muslim lands. However, it is a misconception. Any rational person will know that the ancestors of more than 99 percent Pakistanis were Hindus.She further added that Pakistan doesn't want to accept this truth.The audacious female scholar also slammed Pakistan for backing terrorism, stating the truth was exposed when Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by the US.For long, Subramanian Swamy – a learned man – has been claiming that the DNA of all the Muslims residing in India matches that of Hindus. He has also asserted that the forefathers of Muslims here were Hindus.</comment>

<comment>What BS statement from the CM.</comment>

<comment>Do not blame him, it is the "education" he received in a RSS madrassa.</comment>

<comment>RSS madrassa? lol</comment>

<comment>There is no difference between a Shakhaa and a Madrassa - both teach hate, intolerance and bigotry.</comment>

<comment>good one</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>And get 100 marks </comment>

<comment>There is no such thing as RSS schools. On the other hand madrassas where they teach you to blow yourself up so that you can get 72 whores is well known. And in churches, the Christian priest will ask you to come to pulpit to teach bible and in the name of jesus molest you. Both middle eastern religion only preaches one thing...violence and lust for kids. ---------72 Virgins and BoysMuslims are motivated to terrorism because the Quran tells them that fighting non-believers is a duty of every Muslim and the only way to be certain of going to heaven to enjoy untold sensual pleasures is to die fighting in the cause of Allah.If they can make it to heaven, one of the rewards all Muslims are promised is 72 virgins. The number of virgins is not specified in Quran, it comes from a quotation of Muhammad recorded in one of the lesser known Hadith. ("Hadith" is an Arabic word meaning traditions. After Muhammad's death, several collections of his deeds and sayings were assembled. These collections are called Hadith and form the second most authoritative document is Islam, right after the Quran.)VIRGINS (Houris):Mohammed knew that sex would sell very well among the group of his followers who were motivated to fight battles by the promise of sex slaves and booty. By constantly emphasizing to his followers that they would get untouched virgins in Paradise, Mohammed is clearly expressing his "high" opinion of the institution of marriage and his fairness to women. Once the followers go to heaven, they can conveniently ditch their wives for the fresher and more pleasurable sexual encounters with 'Houris' (beautiful virgins). The poor wives who gave up their virginity for the pleasure of their husbands do not get anything. But wait, Allah is all merciful! He gives the wives the rare honour of watching their husbands deflower those 72 Houris (virgins) and 28 young pre-pubescent boys.The specific Hadith in which the number of virgins is specified is Hadith Al-Tirmidhi in the Book of Sunah (volume IV, chapters on The Features of Paradise as described by the Messenger of Allah, chapter 21, About the Smallest Reward for the People of Paradise. The same hadith is also quoted by Ibn Kathir in his Quranic commentary (Tafsir) of Surah Al-Rahman:"The Prophet Muhammad was heard saying: 'The smallest reward for the people of paradise is an abode where there are 80,000 servants and 72 wives, over which stands a dome decorated with pearls, aquamarine, and ruby, as wide as the distance from Al-Jabiyah [a Damascus suburb] to Sana'a [Yemen]."(QURAN 37:40-4 : "In the Gardens of Paradise, Facing one another on thrones, Round them will be passed a cup of pure wine; White, delicious to the drinkers, Neither they will have any kind of hurt, abdominal pain, headache, or sin, nor will they suffer intoxication from it. And with them will be chaste females, restraining their glances, with wide and beautiful eyes."(QURAN 44:51-55): "Verily! The righteous will be in Paradise. Among Gardens and Springs; Dressed in fine silk and also in thick silk, facing each other, and We shall marry them to Houris with wide, lovely eyes."(QURAN 52: 17-20): "Verily, for those who fear Allah there will be Gardens in Paradise, filled with Delight. Enjoying in that which their Lord has bestowed on them, and the fact that their Lord saved them from the torment of the blazing Fire. The Lord will say: ‘Eat and drink with happiness because of what you used to do’. They will recline with ease on thrones arranged in ranks. And We shall marry them to Houris with wide lovely eyes."(QURAN 55:54-59): "Reclining upon the couches lined with silk brocade, and the fruits of the Gardens will be near at hand. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Wherein will be those houris, restraining their glances upon their husbands, whom no man or jinn has opened their hymens with sexual intercourse before. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? In beauty they are like rubies and coral. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny?"(QURAN 55:70-77): "Therein gardens will be fair wives good and beautiful; Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Houris restrained in pavilions; Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Whom no man has opened their hymens with sexual intercourse before. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny? Reclining on green cushions and rich beautiful mattresses. Then which of the Blessings of your Lord will you deny?"(QURAN 56:37-40): "...We created the houris and made them virgins, loving companions for those on the right hand…."(QURAN 78:31-34): "As for the righteous, they shall surely triumph. Theirs shall be gardens and vineyards, and high-bosomed virgins for companions: a truly overflowing cup."continued......</comment>

<comment>continued....Eternal erection and virginityModern apologists of Islam try to downplay the evident materialism and sexual implications of such descriptions, but, as the Encyclopaedia of Islam says, even orthodox Muslim theologians such as al Ghazali (died 1111 AD) and Al-Ash'ari (died 935 AD) have "admitted sensual pleasures into paradise". The sensual pleasures are graphically elaborated by Al-Suyuti (died 1505 AD), Quranic commentator and polymath. He wrote: "Each time we sleep with a houri we find her virgin. Besides, the penis of the Elected never softens. The erection is eternal; the sensation that you feel each time you make love is utterly delicious and out of this world and were you to experience it in this world you would faint. Each chosen one [ie Muslim] will marry seventy [sic] houris, besides the women he married on earth, and all will have appetising vaginas."BOYS.Homosexuality was and is widely practised in Islamic countries. To please the homosexuals among his followers he promised them pre-pubescent boys in Paradise. So after committing plunder, loot, rape and murder in this life, the followers of Islam get "rewarded" by untouched virginal youths who are fresh like pearls.(QURAN 52:24): "And there will go round boy-servants of theirs, to serve them as if they were preserved pearls."(QURAN 56:17): "They will be served by immortal boys."(QURAN 76:19): "And round about them will (serve) boys of everlasting youth. If you see them, you would think them scattered pearls."One of the reasons Nietzsche hated Christianity was that it "made something unclean out of sexuality", whereas Islam, many would argue, was sex-positive. One cannot imagine any of the Church fathers writing ecstatically of heavenly sex as al-Suyuti did, with the possible exception of St Augustine before his conversion.In our Western world where many scientist purportedly believe in Evolution when in fact they do not inside, it is reported that when confronted with a question on this dichotomy of mind, their usual answer is: "I must believe in Evolution and reject Christianity for Christianity limits my sex life".It seems then that this promise of sensual happiness and sexual bliss in paradise, not only is the motivator for the Islamic terrorists but it may even be a motivator for our secular evolutionists to join the rank of Islam.</comment>

<comment>Beef ban is justified not only from the point of view of its religious factors but also from that of its non hygienic nature. The worms in the meat dont get destroyed unless it is cooked for several hours whereas in common practice both in home kitchen as well as in hotels it is cooked for name sake. Health of the society is  of prime importance to a dedicated Govt. Modi Govt. is dedicated, Modi is dedicated.</comment>

<comment>Dude your eating vegetables with someones shit in it.. Most of them r grown on sewage water. Insecticide and pesticides on them fruits ripened with chemicals atleast in india as most of it is not organic unless ur filthy rich to buy organic vegs. Are you a proud veg eater now. What r u talking about? Worms? People eating veg and meat both survive the same. No study proves anything. So stop with your post of bull_hit n eat what you like and let others eat what they like.</comment>

<comment>That means he is very much concerned about the health of Muslims. Great :-)</comment>

<comment>ladkiyon ko maar maarke saare ke saare ladkiyan hi haryana mein khatam ho jaayegifir ladke ladke shaadi karenge aur ladke paida karenge</comment>

<comment>Secular liberals are opposing it like eating cow meat will make them secular...No wonder these loud mouth leaders must stop blabbering nonsense...The dogs hired from ANI has only jobs to feed statements in the mouth of leaders and then again English media translate and spin them for provoking headlines..</comment>

<comment>why RSS chaddis never ever do any agitation against the unconstitutional khaap panchayats?</comment>

<comment>No worry..new generation dont take them seriously... they will dismiss automatically in next 5-10 years..</comment>

<comment>new gen ki to watt laga deti hai ye khaaps</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>But khap will win.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>have u ever seen any lower caste becoming a sarsanghchalak?</comment>

<comment>No chance. All key positions are held by Brahmins, exclusively, since 1925. .</comment>

<comment>as if brahmin resv</comment>

<comment>Not a single women has ever held any key position. They have "separate" wing for them and one for Muslims too. These Brahmins do not wish to make themselves impure by mixing with women and Muslims. They mix very well with the cows though. </comment>

<comment>Fascism: You have two cows. The government takes both, hires you to take care of them, and sells you the milk.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>RSS keeps spewing hatred on muslims inspite of muslims being so kind...</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Terror activities that have shown involvement of RSS BJP membersGandhiji AssassinationBabri Masjid demolitionRam Mandir riotsBurning alive of Graham Staines and his children2006 Malegaon blasts2007 samjhauta express TWIN bombingsAjmer Dargah attack (Swami Aseemanand implicated Mohan Bhagwat)2008 Malegaon BlastsMecca Masjid BombingsGodhra RiotsAkshardam,Hyderabad Mecca Masjid,Mangalore pub attacksWhipping of muslim guy in mangaloreDabholkar killingKalrburgi murderrationalist murdersDadri Lynching for Iqlakh and his sonMainpuri attacksLove jihad.inflammatory remarks by their peopleSadhi prachiSubramaniam SwamySangeet SomMohan BhagwatYogi AdityanathMahesh Sharma (Cultural minister)Bajrang Dal shettyRSS org twitter account which Narendra Modi even followsRSS runs terror camps that brainwash kids to be anti-indian http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-297981481000's of #HDL terrorists on twitterMOdi not saying anything about communal killingRajnath Singh keeping quiet while they wish everyone inHindu mahasaba wants to forcibly marry couples on valentines dayhttp://www.firstpost.com/india/hindu-mahasabha-is-back-forcefully-marry-couples-on-v-day-and-other-bizarre-ideas-2079739.html.Bajrang Dal beats girl in pubhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7yg-bdlmkohttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-QXhC-ZdXZYBajrang Dal beats couples and abuses girls on Friendship dayhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFgb0KqmzpcBajrang Dal THREATENS & BEATS Valentines Day with Knives and weaponshttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ER1qp2ZXfmQhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LHvLMYX_T64 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Klw91tbGaoYRam sena assaults girls, molested for going to pub.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bd8GzYw3oyEBajrang Dal rapist supported by VHP & Bajrang Dalhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=swVi_8VXSXE.</comment>

<comment>just 4?include some more... lets think.. killing of jews in Israel 100 AD, killing of american Indians in 15th century and what else can we imagine? lets blame the RSS...</comment>

<comment>people should watch NH 10 and crime patrol to see the real situation of haryana</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>i literally cried on seeing the pathetic end of the love couple</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>how could a bro be so cruel, man!</comment>

<comment>"thaari constitution jo hai gurgaon ke malls tak aake khatam ho jaani se"</comment>

<comment>educated sanghis like manohar parrikar, sushmaji, jaitley etc never uttered such nonsense things</comment>

<comment>"educated sanghis" - I am not sure about this - to me it is an oxymoron.</comment>

<comment>Like nationalistic kangressis and commies?</comment>

<comment>Only scoundrels invoke nationalism and patriotism (and you just did). For others it is a given. Tell me another.</comment>

<comment>c'mon. the ppl i have mentioned r well educated</comment>

<comment>They have qualifications. Not sure they are educated.</comment>

<comment>They are, but the moment they open their mouths, one begins to have doubts.</comment>

<comment>never seen them uttering like khattarparrikar is famous in goa</comment>

<comment>Parrikar - using a terrorist to fight a terrorist, in the bargain giving handle to Pakistan. You call that an "educated" comment!</comment>

<comment>Bhonkne do media ko. Haryana UP nahi hai, yahan mullon ko aukat main rakha jaata hai.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Terrible news. I couldn't imagine the time when the Mughals made hindus converts. Surely they must have had a worse time than the dalits? Maybe you too think that all the muzzies here are arabs or persians. Maybe I think their ancestors were tortured or were cowards. Just get on with your life I say. Stop questioning my beliefs.If you had read your history well, almost all the castes have ruled India at some time, including dalits. WTF do you people want from life? You think the world owes you something?</comment>

<comment>hahaha. Jats are tribals and were never a part of your regular Hinduism. We're Scythian remember? We don't even share gotras/ceremonies with most Hindus. You'll one day realize the enormous and diverse pool sanathan dharm encompasses.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Hindu is a category/basket foreigners invented. Sorry if it's a bit more complicated and am unable to make it easier for you to understand. We worship only Shiva. Mathura is the land of Krishna. South India has different gods. Bengalis are totally into another branch - Shakti.Then we have Sankhya, Nyaya etc.Lots of things bind us and this angst of cow slaughter will hopefully unite us. Insha-allah!</comment>

<comment>born hypocrites</comment>

<comment>Haryana asli gauravshaali Hindu rajya hai. Mullo aur ladkiyo ko dono ko aukaat me rakha jaata hai.</comment>

<comment>ji panditji. sachii baat. par yahan mullon ko aukat main rakha hi jaata hai.</comment>

<comment>ladkiyo ka zabran s3x determination karwaaya jaata hai, aur jab ladki janme, to use fek do nadi mein. 55 saal ka buddha 17 saal ki ladki se shaddi karta hai taaki usse ladka mile</comment>

<comment>Yahi ram-rajya toh poore desh me laana hai.</comment>

<comment>lol</comment>

<comment>sachii baat. par yahan mullon ko aukat main rakha hi jaata hai</comment>

<comment>yahan to premi jodo ko bho aukaat mein rakha jaata, pregnant women ko bhi aukaat dikhayi jaati hai jab wo ladki paida karti hai</comment>

<comment>woh jo bhi ho, yahan mullon ko aukat main rakha jaata hai.</comment>

<comment>khap panchayats r social organizations : khujliwal</comment>

<comment>arre bengali, Jat = republic. Humhe humari history mat samjha. Those khaps also decided that we'll fight against mughals forever come what may.The bengal famine not only made you physically weak but mentally a slave race. You're being overrun by muzzies in WB. Hum to aukaat main rakhte hain sooaron ko. Kar le dhee kay jo banta ho. Aur kisi ko khila pila kar kabhi army bhi bhej do, jnu bhar rakha hai. 2 pasli ki internet warrior.</comment>

<comment>i agree with ur last point that commies have destroyed bengalis</comment>

<comment>Whaaa.... ??  * didn't see that coming*fokking googly. right through my defenses.</comment>

<comment>mullo ke saath jo karna hai karobut at least couples aur aurato ko bakhsh do :)</comment>

<comment>tujhe huya kuch? ch00 tiya aurat. R@ndipan ki mausi.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Really like jinnah eating pork and saying it be made the national dish of porkistan?</comment>

<comment>Jinnah is not our role model, nor is Pakistan.</comment>

<comment>The RSS/BJP/Modi practice double standards and doublespeak - it is in their DNA.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>The RSS agenda is being pushed and Narendra Modi is its chief patron.</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>x'ian padre..</comment>

<comment>Brahmin s did but u can change everything peacefully.</comment>

<comment>Tum dono jhute ho . if you both want to blame then only Indian express editors.</comment>

<comment>If so, tell us the truth then?</comment>

<comment>Dekho Indian express ki editor aur  assistant editor Jo so called man hai  who interview karne gaye aur  tape kiya who conversation Jo interview main included nahi thi. Secondly , Jo likha newspaper mein who masala laga kar likha taaki who famous ho sake. Dono sanki editors hai. Saale  kamine editors Danga karwana chahte hai</comment>

<comment>Please listen to the audio recording provided by Huggington Post and Indian Express.</comment>

<comment>Why doesn't Khattar take these media hoouses to court for defamation? Instead what have we here. The BJP distancing from him for his disgusting and unconstitutional remarks, and he trying to express "regret".</comment>

<comment>लगेगी आग तो जलेंगे घर सब के हीयहां पर सिर्फ हमारा मकान थोड़े ही हैमैं जानता हूँ की दुश्मन भी कम नहीं लेकिनहमारी तरह हथेली पर जान थोड़े ही हैहमारे मुँह से जो निकले वो सच की आवाज हैहमारे मुह में तुम्हारी जुबान थोड़े ही हैजो आज ताकतवर हैं, कल नहीं होंगेकिरायेदार हैं सब, मालिक-मकान थोड़े ही हैसभी के लहू ने सीचा है इस मिटटी कोकिसी एक के बाप का हिन्दुस्तान थोड़े ही है!</comment>

<comment>Lagegi aag to jalenge ghar sab ke hiYaha pe sirf hamara makaan thodi haiMain janta hoon ki dushman bhi kam nahi lekin Hamari tarah hatheli pe jaan thodi haiHamare munh se jo nikle woh sach KI awaaz haiHamare munh me tumhari jubaan thodi haiJo aaj taakarwar hain kal nahi honge Kiraaye-daar hain sab, maalik-makaan thodi haiSabhi ke lahu ne seecha hai is mitti koKisi ek ke baap ka HINDUSTAN thodi hai</comment>

<comment>Funny, only sickular / libtaard hindus are condemning Khattar and have felt hurt by what he "allegedly" said. Meanwhile muslims have agreed to stop eating beef or migrate to Porkistan</comment>

<comment>True, only sikular / libtards Hindus are condemning Khattar.1) That is wonderful. It is par for the course.2) How can intolerant, bigoted and hate mongering Sanghis ever condemn him? After all, he is talking about their mother (Gau Mata) - however, these people never tell us who their father is. I wonder why?</comment>

<comment>Muslims: don t talk  abt our propet and bookwe will kill uBut we can joke ,question others beleifs</comment>

<comment>kulkarni ji hamare hindu samaaj ko badnaam karwa ke rahenge. aur danga riot bhi bharka rahe hai. bad bad kulkarni ji yeh theek nahi.</comment>

<comment>Bhaisab me unke bareme bolne laga to dange honge aur ooloog mazak udate rahe</comment>

<comment>Isis is true Islam They are matching every word and work of propet</comment>

<comment>This comment was deleted.</comment>

<comment>Hai you kyu kulkarni ji ko bewajah pareshan kar rahe ho . tum Jo abuse kar rahe  ho yeh galat hai and you please don't use abusing language.</comment>

<comment>I did 69 with ur momIt was very tasty ur a lucky guy</comment>

<comment>No kulkarni ji please remember Gandhi ji don't abuse please. Let God decide.</comment>

<comment>no please comment on peacefull matter to bring hindus and muslim together. no kulkarni ji your comments may hurt sentiments of people of any religion. no personal bad religious comments please</comment>

<comment>Yes jiPls read comments below They ran away once I started </comment>

<comment>Then those who wrote bad comments before you .they should be first ashamed on their comment. They wrote worst. But now you can make peaceful comments on religion but editors of  Indian express should be punished.</comment>

<comment>Those who hv newly aquired love fr cow meat after bjp coming to power shd be 1st fed pork.</comment>

<comment>Who the hell you imagine you are to tell what others should eat or not eat? This country does not belong to your daddy.</comment>

<comment>Else smday u wll be lynched lk up guy.Yes this country belongs to me,my father n my forefater's,n if abharmic cult illegitimate filth's want to live in this country they hv to follow it,else they can go to cult lands.</comment>

<comment>tu hota kaun hai kissi ko kuch bhi feed karne wala. apni plate ka dhyan rakh; dusre khudki plate ka dhyan rakh lenge. tujhe choudhawry kisne banaya be?</comment>

<comment>agreed sure</comment>

<comment>It's very soft and more importantly its legal to consume</comment>

<comment>kulkarni ji hamare hindu samaaj ko badnaam karwa ke rahenge. aur danga riot bhi bharka rahe hai. bad bad kulkarni ji yeh theek nahi</comment>

<comment>Is Abraham a propetMuslims: yesDid said AllahNoThen why that lahilla illah</comment>

<comment>Muslims can never match propet WhyHe slept with dead women for s@x</comment>

<comment>no no no very bad no religion comments please you are requested to point out only indian express editors who are liable for this debate.</comment>

<comment>Ask those who r joking abt Hindu beleifsI will be last person to comment on rlgn</comment>

<comment>Our god krishna with thousand girlfriends stealing womens clothes all while being married is not a beacon of morality</comment>

<comment>Who cares for those who consider Hindus as pagansLet's protect our culture from Arab imperialism called Islam</comment>

<comment>Cows will be safeguarding the borders of India </comment>

<comment>go to hell with cows and now finish with topic</comment>

<comment>Why such a commotion? Today I heard in a TV channel that there are 17 crores muslims in the country.Beef is their important menu in their food item. it becomes all the more important because they have to eat it to show their freedom to eat to Hindus.It gives double taste which our free lance will proudly put it as their news.Then how many cows have to be slaughtered everyday! whether we  have so many cows could be made available on daily basis to meet the eating freedom of the community strictly as per the freedom to eat under the constitution. Whether enough milk will be available to the children of the country including to the Muslim community. Cow slaughtering is noble profession required to be done under the constitution to constantly remind the Hindus about the right to eat beef by other communities which one cannot disagree.Hindus are fools to object. Sorry beef eaters from Hindu religion we hope you have some sympathy towards cows.For Christians we leave it to their wisdom. Further in the case of shortage cows can be stolen which may lead to law and order problems.</comment>

<comment>Yes with blessings of gou mata we kill all those cutva jihadis</comment>

<comment>Factually cow beef is soft </comment>

<comment>Even pork khaa naa mohammad</comment>

<comment>im using gaunyle instead of phenyl. its just awesome</comment>

<comment>cowdung is a good facepack, girls should use it to have fairer skin</comment>

<comment>Will the next mother's day also include Gau mata?</comment>

<comment>The RSS/BJP/Modi and their bhakts keep telling us that cow is their mother (gau mata), but they never tell us who their father is.</comment>

<comment>Don't ask this Feku will get one day from UN for cows </comment>

<comment>we should not blame khattar saabafter all its not his faultthis is bound to happen when an illiterate pracharak is appointed in a higher postthere r two types of sanghiseducated sanghis and illiterate sanghis</comment>

<comment>1) educated sanghis - that is an oxymoron.2) educated sanghis - there is no such thing as educated sanghis. If one is educated, then ............. and if you are sanghi, then ....................</comment>

<comment>there r educated ones also like manohar parrikar, sushmaji, jaitley, etc</comment>

<comment>Harayana is progressing well under his leadership</comment>

<comment>cows in my locality r doing cabaret dance, after all indian govt cares so much about them</comment>

<comment>Has sc allowed it like maha dance bars </comment>

<comment>BJP shuould change its symbol to cow</comment>

<comment>Why not</comment>

<comment>If cow is your mother, then why do you let your mother roam on the streets eating sh!t? Take it home & feed it.</comment>

<comment>But they never tell us who the father is? Do you know why?</comment>

<comment>..oho so that is the explanation from people like you to say that..roaming cows should be eaten by people? In Christian faith it is put forth mercilessly that animals are subservient to humans, and humans have the right to do whatever they want to.. I believe people like yours mentality is the main reason why communalising and polarising are touching new heights..abetting communalism is equavalent to doing riots.. I wonder what kind of tolerance you have on other religions..Maybe people like you step in to help Hindus to select their "divine" animal of their own..</comment>

<comment>If you speak like this bhakts will cry like Feku Feku and bhakts are attached to mom but won't treat them well</comment>

<comment>Every time I see a cow I feel my lord Krishna is present in itLet's protect itKabbah is house of God. - a beliefCow has presence of god - a beleif Let's respect each others beleifs</comment>

<comment>Take your God home & don't allow it to eat sh!t.</comment>

<comment>Mistaken God is in cowCow itself is not GodI will be fortunate if I get a chance to serve it</comment>

<comment>I prefer to be rational than fanatic.Cow itself is not God. But it is wrong if one eats beef. There is God in a human too, as spiritualists say. Is it okay to lynch a man because he supposedly ate a cow (which is not God)?</comment>

<comment>What percentage of God is in cow? Also, some people say cow is mother. Is it mother or is it God? Can you quote any religious scripture on this?</comment>

<comment>.. If you have no faith in Hinduism, is it sane to ask for scriptures?..I can see the religious hatred in you..better be careful..people of this country should take care of your mentality..</comment>

<comment>For Hindus all are God Cow rat lion dogs snakes even rivers </comment>

<comment>For Muslims God is sitting in box in kabbah hahahaha</comment>

<comment>Anyone says something against Hindus need not be a Muslim he can be aethist also </comment>

<comment>I can smell cut bullas</comment>

<comment>So we can slaughter it no issues </comment>

<comment>U destroying the idol and temple</comment>

<comment>Is it same play of words with the idols?</comment>

<comment>Only the white cow, I guess. Take it home and feed it without letting it loiter the streets swallowing plastic bags.</comment>

<comment>No black cow known as kapila gou is most auspicious .I feed to cows daily</comment>

<comment>Why dont you keep it in your house so that it can be taken care off.</comment>

<comment>Well said!</comment>

<comment>A Holes like Khattar call cow their mother but have no issues in milking them for profit, what does it make them? pi$mp?</comment>

<comment>I did not got what u want to say</comment>

<comment>Ye achanak in logon ko 'Gau Mata' ki yaad kyun aane lagi??</comment>

