<comment>Who are you by the way? apologist, intellectual, modi-basher, Congress-supporter or confusionist? What are you trying to say? Give it a break please! Enough of condemnation! Go and do your work positively on ground. Or it is just confusing people, your job? Stop this non-sense. This has gone for too long in the media. It is no more sensational!</comment>

<comment>This author is  just trolling. right ?</comment>

<comment>Law and order is state subject, so the Samajwadi thugs are responsible and the pre$$tituttes are earning their bread from them</comment>

<comment> Why was Moodbidri lynching not covered? Any crime committed against Hindus is of no importance?Heard of Moodbidri killing of Hindu youth on Oct 9?MANGALURU:A 29-year-old Bajrang Dal activist was killed by a group of six unidentified people near Samaja Mandir, Samagaragundi, Moodbidri town, on Friday morning. The victim has been identified as Prashanth alias Mallige Prashanth, a flower vendor and a resident of Hosabettu.Sources in the Moodbidri police station said that the killing took place when Prashanth was heading towards his flower shop at 7.30 am.Six miscreants, in three motorbikes, waylaid him near Samaja Mandir and assaulted him with lethal weapons. Later, the assailants fled from the scene leaving Prashanth in a pool of blood.Passersby immediately shifted Prashanth to private hospital in Mangaluru. However, he later succumbed  to injuries .The situation in Moodbidri turned tense soon after the killing.  Police personnel were deployed at key locations in the town to prevent any untoward incident. Meanwhile, a few miscreants allegedly assaulted mediapersons when they reached the spot to report the incident.Heavy police force was deployed in Moodbidri town and other parts of the district and no untoward incident was reported in the district till 8.30 pm.Mild Lathi-chargeChaos erupted in Moodbidri town when miscreants pelted stone on five shops in the evening. This resulted in a large crowd gathering at the spot. Police had to resort to mild lathi-charge to disperse the crowd. A case has been registered at Moodbidri police station.Why are the likes of Rajdeep Sardesai, DarkhaButt, Sagarika Ghose, Arnab not screaming? Why are they quite?</comment>

<comment>Looks like Congress in Karnataka is trying EVERYTHING to cover this up, including the murder of the witness in Moodbidri caseEyewitness in Moodbidri Murder Found DeadMANGALURU:Sixty-year-old Vaman Poojary, who was an eyewitness in the controversial murder of Bajrang Dal activist Prashanth Poojary of Moodbidri, has died under mysterious circumstances.Poojary was missing from his house since Thursday afternoon.According to police, he may have committed suicide but the reason is yet to established.A case has been registered at the Moodbidri police station. Police are looking into whether Vaman was facing any threat to his life.Vaman Poojary was a tender coconut vendor near Prashanth Poojary’s shop. Police confirmed that Vaman Poojary was an eyewitness to the murder. Is a HINDU life in INDIA of no value compared to a muslim ?</comment>

<comment>correct guru. ella soole maklu, anti hindu, anti modi.</comment>

<comment>soole makklu. ellarnu nilsi shoot maadi sayisbeku.</comment>

<comment>why should Modi Apologise for the actions of others? why don't you Apologise.</comment>

<comment>Akshaya,, thank you for the note which I guess includes me, but allow me to point out the obvious, the writers who protested by attaining a sudden nirvana and giving all the past incidents during the congress era a miss, somehow rediscovered their conscience in the carcass of a cow..However you may couch it, it does not remove the fact that particular group has been protesting against Modi and his government before elections, during elections and post it, even while Modi traveled to the US and has no logical counter to date as regards their new found conscience. And more to the point, it is not about precedence bur rather your new found belief that all riots must be laid at the door of the pm never mind the fact that law and order falls under the domains of various states..incidentally care to point us to a single article which hauls the SP government over the coals for their utter and total incompetence vis-a-vis dadri?And as for apologists taking a stand, Hypocritical much? Why don't you just come right out and admit that being part of the sickular front, you would like nothing better than to have the rancid maggot ridden corpse called the congress back in the center..at least, have the requisite anatomy to shed your shallowness before you ask others to do the same..</comment>

<comment>Oh STFU!! Have you urself mentioned a word on Prashanth Poojary?? No... Was he not a victim of "communal" forces??? Yes, he was. So when you are a hypocrite, try not pointing fingers at others. Most of us condemn the killings in Dadri.... But we are sick and tired of hearing of it... Most of us want to personally kill the Sangeet Soms, Mahesh Sharmas, Sadhvi Prachis, Yogi Adityanaths, Niranjans etc. But fortunately for them, we live in a civilized society... Most of us condemn the killing of the rationalists... But wonder why the PM has to respond to it, when law and order is a state subject?? Weren't rationalists killed during the time of MMS?? Did you hound him for a statement then?? No... So pls.. Take your bucket of boo-effin'-hoo and sell your crazy elsewhere... We are all stocked up here!Stop effin' trying to guilt us just because we voted Modi and the BJP to power... Given a chance, most of us would still choose to vote for him again!! Even if thousands of hitherto nameless "writers", "secularists" and "intellectuals" cry themselves hoarse!! Hypocrites, the lot of them!!! There... Now you have a clear idea of where we stand!! Now, eff off!</comment>

<comment>So, what is the author suggesting......that the next time something like this happens in UP (and it will, given the extinct law and order there), Modi move a resolution to impose President's rule there.....???Is the author suggesting that Modi, as the PM, completely OVERRIDE the elected CM and just kick him out and take charge of all state matters too????Silly, immature, foolishly conceived article.Why does it not talk about the total LACK of governance given by the SP and Congress in UP and Karnatak respectively????</comment>

<comment>"What we have is an explanation, rather justification, for such acts through mischievous and circuitous logic: this happened during the Congress also, didn't it? Shouldn't the majority sentiment matter too? This is the direct outcome of the policy of Muslim appeasement that has been going on for years."Its none of these you dummy. Law and order has been completely destroyed by the misrule of SP. Is the lynching of the man in Dadri the rare violent incident in a peaceful state?</comment>

<comment>You nailed it.The problem is that all this is being used to unfairly target Modi, when the blame lies at the doorstep of the SP (for Dadri) and the Congress (for Kalburgi)...! Why did they not take any action against these crimes, why are they both silent about this???Modi is being targetted due to the elections in Bihar, hence also the high rotation whipping up of these matters by the paid media.This article is 'Tedhi baat, Full bakwas'!</comment>

<comment> It's not really necessary to glorify those with the mad cow disease as apologists.</comment>

<comment>Tumhari kya aukaat hai mishra that you dare to assign name to others,  2 penny congee poodles can only do one thing which u r doing now - presstitootion</comment>

<comment>There are apologists and then there are bhakts...the author clearly belongs to the latter category. One of the major complaints of the so-called liberals, seculars and humanists (as you term them) has been Modi's utter silence on the growing intolerant soundbytes provided by his own ministers, leave out fringe groups. Afterall you cannot get more central than ministers belonging to the government itself. Nowhere have I read Modi categorically slam the rising intolerance in the country (people can correct me if I am wrong here). Modi has not spoken a single word about the killing of rationalists in the country who dare to espouse ideals that are at odds with the sangh parivaar. Regarding the Dadri lynching...the closest that Modi came to commenting on it was that the incident was a sad one (that was just one comment) The rest have been simply general statements asking hindus and muslims not to fight. Did he take any action against a BJP MLA (or was it an MP) who spouted rubbish soon after the 'incident'? Nearly a month after the lynching and even as elections go on in Bihar, Modi and Shah have supposedly summoned the 'beef brigade' (as one TV channel has put out). Yet we all know that no action will be taken against them...just as no action has been taken against other ministers who have made similar utterances. Finally like the new twist that you have given to the situation....choose between Modi or fringe...just like Pakistan says we want peace but there are non state actors present...the fringe here being equated to none-state actors...had Modi really punished his ministers who made such stupid comments the first time around then there would have been no repeats...afterall a dog will bark only when his master allows it to</comment>

<comment>What BJP or Modi or their supporters has got anything to do with a State subject of law and order? Has Modi not mentioned this as well? Where were these secularists when so much of violence happened in India for some cartoonist did something in 6000 Miles away? You can't escape answering these questions because rational debate is all about counter-view points, consistency from both sides! We all know this incident is related to Akhilesh Yadhav, SP running UP government and Modi or BJP cannot be held responsible beyond condemning the attack and discourage such crime. But such measures rarely come from the secularists or liberal apologists!It this is uncomfortable then you have to blame yourself for the hypocrisy! This is a NON-ISSUE now, we have more critical development issues are confronting the nation. You can find millions of such issues if you care to look at other victims from other communities without getting so much attention like this!</comment>

<comment>the sickular media both print and television  has never reconciled to the idea of modi becoming the prime minister today there is is no denying that there are deterrents within the bjp but why is  SOME RANDOM SADHVI  OR A VAGUE MAHARAJ  ON THE FRONT PAGES OF NEWSPAPERS  WHY ARE THEY GIVEN SUCH PROMINENCE WHY DO THEIR VIEWS GET AMPLIFIED WHILE THE REGULATION OF ADHAAR CARD THE DIGITAL INDIA  NETWORK COMPULSORY BANK ACCOUNTS  WITH INSURANCE FOR THE DEPRIVED IS NEVER HEARD AKILESH YADAV IN WHOSE STATE THERE IS A HUGE COMMUNAL PROBLEM IS NOT HELD RESPONSIBLE AND THE KARNATAKA CONGRESS CM WAS NOT ONCE ASKED ABOUT THE KALBURGI MURDER  CASE IN KARNATAKA THE PEOPLE OF INDIA WILL HAVE TO GET USED TO THIS JAUNDICED VIEWS OF THE SICKULAR MEDIA</comment>

