<comment>Pappu kahin aur jhanda gado</comment>

<comment>Because Mr. Gandhi, they were hare-brained schemes, draining the economy and making the populace lazy and becoming ever eager zombies to seek doles and handouts from a Mai Baap sarkar. The 10 year UPA rule killed the animal spirit residing in the Indian economy , that was helped and being propped up  enormously by an upswing in global  economy.Everybody knows this but is reluctant to accept for fear of displeasing the High priestess of the Congress.In the current era of trolls, it is the representatives of evangelical religions that are spewing venom on NDA rule, more out of desperation . Writers and artists are being booted out of their decades long comfort zones ( Lutyens Delhi) and as a measure of vengeance and out of gratitude for the rewards they received during the UPA rule, these jokers enact an award waapsi, led by the shameless bootlicker of the Nehru Gandhi family.. Nayatara Sehgal, with the sole purpose of defaming the govt. Take any issue, Akhlaq killing, Beef controversy, award waapsi, intolerance, .. there is a behind the curtains  story for every issue mentioned.They know that for another three years , they cannot dislodge the present govt. But their aim is to create bogus issues and bogies to troll the govt in every medium,, social media, parliament, etc. The media  has become an extended arm of this opposition , merely seeking to repay favours doled out during the decade long venal rule . Their aim is to ensure that in 2019, te NDA DOES NOT GET ANOTHER TERM.But three years is a long time in politics. Enough time for NDA TO make good any policy lapses !</comment>

<comment>MNREGA will show how much money was being swallowed by dalals. The big if is that will Modi be able to cut out those people who loot in the name of the poor. I have seen villagers get MNREGA for simply having a day out. Accountability is the key.If Modi can make NREGA work, it will be an incredible achievement. MNREGA is structured to leak money. It is fundamentally flawed except that its intends to do good for the poor which in fact it has not till date. It has only doled out money to people who are in power and their near and dearMy view is that MNREGA should be reworked to make it totally transparent which is not possible. I would rather dump it rather than waste time in correcting the mistakes.Much better option would be to set up manufacturing companies in villages and give each family a fixed basic income to cover basic needs at least.</comment>

<comment>He doesn't have brain to speak so much. At the most he can utter 3 sentence without reading. So much of talk is sure written by copyrighter. He just talked without understand ing </comment>

<comment>hahahaha.. stupid fellow.. if you have brain then you would understand.. all programmes started by you were for you to loot and keep poor people poor by turning them into beggars..</comment>

<comment>Pappu's sound bytes are now getting as irritating as a mosquito buzzing in your ear when u r sleeping :-(</comment>

<comment>Adam Smith, the father of economics, says in economics Man Proposes and God Disposes. If every body in a nation become do-gooders -- God disposes -- and we will have hell on earth. if man proposes to be selfish -- God again disposes -- and we will have prosperity and peace.Giving rational explanation of God, the elder do-gooders , MK Gandhi, Jayaprakash Narayan, Ambedkar etc forgot that a strong socialist state is required to do good. And it will demand its pound of flesh closest to the heart – rampant corruption. A strong state emerges in an environment of shortages – to distribute scant resources. Any socialist state will NOT destroy the reason for its existence. 24 hour water supply will reduce water required to be released by 30%. No Government Engineer in India will accept this. Scarcity, distress is required for the reason for its existence. If no scarcity exists it will manufacture it. Mysore had water scarcity even though it had KRS dam beside it. It is a question of power. A society can either have equality or freedom but never both. Why? To enforce equality a strong and intrusive state is required. Stateism is against Individualism and kills freedom.</comment>

