Headline::::
Alexander Litvinenko and the most radioactive towel in history




DateTime::::2016-03-06T18:00:40+0000



<p><span class="drop-cap"><span class="drop-cap__inner">I</span></span>t was a warm autumn day when the two Russian visitors arrived in Grosvenor Street, central London. Their names were Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun; the date was 16 October 2006. They had arrived that morning from Moscow carrying something that British customs failed to detect. Not drugs or large sums of cash, but something so otherworldly, it had never been seen before in the UK.</p>

<p>The substance was polonium, a highly radioactive isotope. It is probably the most toxic poison known to man when swallowed or inhaled – more than 100bn times more deadly than hydrogen cyanide. It had come from a Russian nuclear reactor. The job of Lugovoi and Kovtun was to deploy it. They had come to poison <a class="u-underline" data-component="auto-linked-tag" data-link-name="auto-linked-tag" href="http://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko">Alexander Litvinenko</a>, a Russian dissident, MI6 employee and Kremlin critic. The visiting killers had no personal grudge against their target. They had been sent by Russia’s FSB spy agency, in an operation likely to have been approved by Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin.</p>

<p>Scotland Yard has never established how the assassins transported the polonium. The amounts were very small and easy to disguise. There are several possibilities: a container with the poison administered by a pipette-style dropper. Or an aerosol-like spray. Even a modified fountain pen would do the trick. Within its container, the polonium was safe. Out of it, it was highly dangerous. Ingest it, and you were dead.</p>

<p>Lugovoi and Kovtun, it would become apparent, had no idea what they were carrying. Their behaviour in Britain was idiotic, verging on suicidal. Nobody in Moscow appears to have told them Po-210 had intensely radioactive properties. Or that it left a trace – placing them in specific locations and indicating, via telltale alpha-radiation markings, who sat where. It was possible to identify anything and everything these clueless assassins touched.</p>

<p>That morning – at 11.49 – Lugovoi called Litvinenko from Gatwick airport to confirm their meeting that afternoon at the intelligence firm Erinys in Grosvenor Street. Litvinenko thought this was a routine meeting. Lugovoi had offered himself as Litvinenko’s business partner, giving advice to western firms seeking to invest in <a class="u-underline" data-component="auto-linked-tag" data-link-name="auto-linked-tag" href="http://www.theguardian.com/world/russia">Russia</a>.</p>

<p>The killers travelled by train to central London. They checked into the Best Western hotel on Shaftesbury Avenue, in the heart of Soho. The first rule of spycraft is not to draw attention to yourself. But from the moment they stepped on to UK soil, Lugovoi and Kovtun attracted attention. It wasn’t just that they were assassins: they <em>looked</em> like assassins, a couple of stage villains from KGB casting.</p>

<p>When the pair swapped their casual clothes for “business” attire, their appearance prompted hotel staff to chuckle. Kovtun was wearing a silvery metallic polyester-type suit and Lugovoi was kitted out in checks. They had matched their shiny outfits with colourful shirts and ties. They wore chunky jewellery.</p>

<p>According to hotel manager Goran Krgo, the two men resembled stereotypical eastern European gangsters. “The colours didn’t match, the suits were either too big or too small. They just didn’t look like people who are used to wearing suits. They looked like – I think the expression is: like a donkey with a saddle.”</p>

<p>At 3pm, Litvinenko met Lugovoi and Kovtun in Grosvenor Street. Waiting for them was Tim Reilly, the Russian-speaking head of Erinys; he shook their hands and led them into the boardroom.</p>

<p>The meeting began in typically English style, with talk of the sunny weather. Then Lugovoi steered the conversation round to tea. He suggested they all drink some, joking that the English had cups of tea all the time. Reilly declined and told them he had just drunk water from the cooler. Lugovoi was weirdly persistent.</p>

<p>“They kept on saying to me – don’t you want any [tea], won’t you have any?” Reilly recalled.</p>

<p>Reilly served cups of tea to his three guests. He sat to the right of Litvinenko, who was at the head of the table with his back facing the bay window; immediately across the table from Reilly was Lugovoi. Kovtun sat to Lugovoi’s left. He said nothing. After making tea, Reilly – fortuitously for the would-be assassins – went to the loo.</p>

<p>We don’t know how the polonium was deployed. The forensic evidence suggests that either Lugovoi or Kovtun slipped it into Litvinenko’s tea. For the next 30 minutes, the tea sat in front of him, a little to his left – an invisible nuclear murder weapon primed to go off. Lugovoi and Kovtun must have been barely listening to the conversation: for them, the only question was, would Litvinenko drink?</p>

<p>Litvinenko didn’t drink. One can only imagine what must have been going through Lugovoi’s and Kovtun’s minds when the meeting broke up, his drink untouched.</p>

<p>When nuclear scientists examined the Erinys table, they found that, in Reilly’s damning words, it was “heaving” with radioactive contamination. It appeared there had been substantial spillage. Reilly wondered whether he, too, had been an intended target. One spot in front of where Litvinenko had been sitting showed exceptionally high alpha-radiation readings of more than 10,000 counts a second. Scientists later identified the scene as one of “primary contamination”. That meant the radiation could only have come from deployed polonium. Other parts of the baize had readings of 2,300 counts a second. One chair – where either Lugovoi or Kovtun had been sitting – registered at 7,000 counts a second.</p>

<p>The Russians would later claim that it was Litvinenko who had poisoned them, during this, their first significant encounter in Mayfair. All subsequent traces, they said, could be explained by this initial radioactive contact. It was a version they would repeat to Russian state media, which transmitted it as true.</p>

<p>This version was easily disproved when Scotland Yard reconstructed Litvinenko’s journey from his home to Green Park using his Oyster card. He had travelled on the 43 bus, getting on at Friern Barnet, then taking the tube into central London from Highgate station. The bus – vehicle registration LR02 BCX – was found and tested for contamination. There wasn’t any.</p>

<p>Lugovoi and Kovtun, by contrast, left a lurid nuclear stain wherever they went, including their hotel rooms, well before their first meeting with Litvinenko. After leaving Erinys, Litvinenko took the pair to his favourite branch of Itsu in Piccadilly Circus, close to the Ritz. They sat downstairs. Polonium was found here, too. The visitors took their leave of Litvinenko.</p>

<p>Afterwards, Lugovoi claimed that he and Kovtun strolled around Soho for an hour and a half. They dropped in to a bar, Dar Marrakesh in the Trocadero centre, where Lugovoi smoked a £9 shisa pipe on the terrace. Scotland Yard later retrieved the pipe. It was easy to spot: the handle gave off a ghostly alpha-radiation glow.</p>

<p>Back at home in Muswell Hill, Litvinenko felt mildly unwell. He threw up, just once. His vomiting spasm was due to exposure to radiation – just from being near the poison. Litvinenko thought little of this episode. He had unwittingly survived his first encounter with polonium.</p>

<p>At 1am, the would-be killers returned to the Best Western hotel. At some point that day or the next, Lugovoi handled polonium in the privacy of his room, 107. He appears to have transferred it here from one container to another. And to have disposed of it down the bathroom sink. We know this because Lugovoi’s plughole showed massive alpha-radiation readings of 1,500 counts a second. There were lower readings elsewhere in the bathroom, and in the bedroom next door. Kovtun’s room, 306, was also heavily contaminated.</p>

<p>The two Russians had booked into the Best Western for two nights, with Lugovoi paying in advance. But the next day, 17 October, they abruptly checked out and took a taxi to the Parkes hotel in Beaufort Gardens, Knightsbridge. Lugovoi explained the switch by saying he “didn’t like the condition of the rooms”. The real reason, most probably, was to distance himself from the poison, which he had efficiently tipped down the bathroom U-bend.</p>

<p>Front office manager Giuliana Rondini was on duty when the Russians walked in. After chatting, Lugovoi made a request. Was there somewhere fun where he and Kovtun “might meet some girls”? Rondini was used to dealing tactfully with these kinds of inquiries. She recommended a house across the street. “It was well known with girls. It was a brothel,” she said. Failing that, she suggested an Italian restaurant. “It was a place where you could go and have a pizza but also have fun and pick up girls. Pizza with extras, I would say.”</p>

<p>About 11.30pm, Lugovoi rang Litvinenko to say that he was missing out on fun times. He said that he and Kovtun had hired a rickshaw and that they were going on an hour-long joyride through central London – two off-duty assassins enjoying themselves amid the bright lights of Soho. Their rickshaw driver was Polish. He spoke “not bad” Russian. It appears they asked again about girls. The driver recommended a private members’ place in Jermyn Street popular with big-spending Russians.</p>

<p>This was HeyJo, a club founded in 2005 by a former fruit-and-veg stall owner from Essex called Dave West. It featured mirrored walls, frilly pink cubicles, waitresses dressed as naughty nurses, and a bronze phallus. There was a dancefloor and a Russian-themed restaurant, Abracadabra, with silver tables. The bordello theme extended to the bathrooms, where water spouted from penis-shaped taps.</p>

<p>Lugovoi and Kovtun spent two hours at HeyJo, leaving at 3am. Detectives later found traces of radiation in cubicle nine – on the backrest and cushions. There were low levels on a bench, a table in the restaurant and on a door in the gents’. No polonium was found on the phallus. The floor was clean. Apparently, the men from Moscow didn’t dance.</p>

<p>They didn’t score either. The following morning, as they checked out for their flight back to Moscow, Rondini asked Lugovoi how they got on. His reply was uncharacteristically honest: “We were not lucky that night,” he told her.</p>

<p>Lugovoi’s conversations with his FSB bosses following his first unsuccessful attempt to poison Litvinenko can only be imagined. In short, he had failed. The upshot was that, within days, Lugovoi returned to the UK, this time alone, bringing with him another container of radioactive poison. He flew on 25 October from Moscow to London, on British Airways flight 875.</p>

<p>He sat in business class, seat 6K. He arrived shortly after midnight at the Sheraton Park Lane, a hotel overlooking Piccadilly, with a frontage of black classical pillars. Inside, the hotel was rather worn. Lugovoi stayed in room 848, on the eighth floor.</p>

<p>Lugovoi met Litvinenko in the ground-floor Palm Court, an afternoon tearoom furnished in high art-deco style, with Chinese screen paintings, vases and lamps. Litvinenko produced two Orange SIM cards so that he and Lugovoi had a secure way of communicating. As ever, Litvinenko drank tea, from a silver teapot. Lugovoi ordered three glasses of red wine and a Cuban cigar.</p>

<p>For unknown reasons, Lugovoi failed to deploy the latest vial of polonium. One possible explanation is that the Palm Court bar had video cameras, which Lugovoi would have seen. Or perhaps he suspected he was being watched. Did the British have him under surveillance? (The answer was no.) It’s possible he had got fresh orders from Moscow. Either way, Lugovoi decided to abort the operation.</p>

<p>This left him with a problem: what to do with the poison? Lugovoi’s solution was simple. In his hotel room, he tipped the polonium down the bathroom sink again, this time mopping it up with a couple of towels. He left the towels for the cleaner. And he appeared to have dumped the container in the white pedal bin next to the lavatory.</p>

<p>When scientists later tested Lugovoi’s hotel room they walked into a scene from an atomic horror story. The door to Lugovoi’s room was highly contaminated. It showed a reading of more than 30,000 counts a second. Inside, there was further contamination. The situation in the bathroom was even worse. The inside of the pedal bin registered what scientists called “full-scale deflection”, a monster reading of 30,000-plus. There was radiation everywhere: on the wall under the sink, the floor and bath, plus another massive result from the bathroom door.</p>

<p>The two scientists wearing protective gear gazed at their instruments incredulously. They asked to be withdrawn from the room. The team was stood down on safety grounds.</p>

<p>Amazingly, two months later, detectives located the towels that Lugovoi had chucked away. They had ended up stuck in a laundry chute in the hotel’s basement. A 3ft by 3ft metal service tube ran the full height of the building. At its bottom was a mountain of unwashed sheets and towels.</p>

<p>Lugovoi’s bath towel was found in a green laundry bag on a shelf. His hand towel was discovered at the base of the chute.</p>

<p>The levels of radiation were so alarming that the towels were sent to the Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston, the UK government nuclear facility. The contamination was unprecedented. The bath towel gave a reading of 6,000 counts a second, or 130,000 becquerels per sq cm.</p>

<p>The most extreme object, however, was Lugovoi’s white hand towel. The initial reading came in as full-scale deflection, greater than 10,000 counts a second. Re-tested at Aldermaston, it yielded an astonishing result: in excess of 17m becquerels per sq cm.</p>

<p>To put this in context, the equivalent of 10m–30m becquerels absorbed into an adult male’s blood would be likely to be fatal within one month. The towel was the single most radioactive object recovered by Scotland Yard during its decade-long inquiry into Litvinenko’s murder. Probably the most radioactive towel in history.</p>

<p><span class="bullet">•</span> Extracted from A Very Expensive Poison by Luke Harding (Guardian Faber £12.99). Buy a copy now for £7.99, go to <a class="u-underline" data-component="in-body-link" data-link-name="in body link" href="https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/381398/s/very-expensive-poison/">bookshop.theguardian.com</a> or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.</p>




Author::::CommunityMod
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:58:00Z
Comments on this thread are soon to close. Thanks for your contributions.



Author::::braciole
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:56:54Z
more than 100bn times more deadly than hydrogen cyanide



Author::::starsweeper
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:56:42Z
The article suggests the stooges had no idea of the scientific properties of what they were carrying, nor the dangers of handling it themselves. I expect they will grt cancer at some point.... though the Russians will cover that up too.



Author::::John Farragher
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:53:38Z
How did they avoid killing themselves, it appears from this article that they were very lucky or protection of some sort saved them from killing themselves



Author::::longlankin
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:53:11Z
The article is somewhat dramatic. The material wasn't dangerous unless ingested. So unless they decided to add some to their morning coffee, or they fancied eating a towel doused in the stuff, they were never in any real danger from it. And I have to say that you criticise an exhaustively investigated as being 'fantasy' and then go on to claim that Diana was murdered. I think that hiring a driver to get drunk and crash a car at high speed is not the most effective means of assassination. No one would be idiotic enough to endanger themselves like that, whereas in the case of Litvinenko's killers ignorance or carelessness seems a far more plausible explanation. And that's without mentioning that orchestrating Diana's assassination would also have meant somehow getting her to cooperate and not put her seatbelt on. So yeah, you're more than a bit contradictory and delusional. A strange combination of both paranoid cynicism and extreme naivety. Or maybe you're just one of those Kremlin-bots I hear about.



Author::::Sparebulb
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:46:17Z
It could be breathed in, but it is really unlikely. The party is over once it has travelled 3 CM through air and the radiation travels in straight lines, relatively slowly (about 5% speed of light if IRC) with a relatively large mass- so it is reacting with every atom it hits and running out of steam so to speak. However that tiny amount of Po 210 will keep giving out that deadly energy for at least 138 days.



Author::::PrescottBoil
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:45:16Z
It could be, of course, that the 'Russian secret police' are so confident in the ability of Britain's 'useful idiots', to whom the Guardian is the house journal, to put their fingers in the ears, close their eyes and say 'La La La La, it's a British establishment conspiracy', that they don't see any need to cover their tracks at all. 



Author::::longlankin
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:42:50Z
It's a balance of probabilities. You can't be 100% certain about things. That's why people are declared guilty beyond reasonable doubt in trials. It doesn't change the fact that we can be confident of their guilt. Your doubts are unreasonable.



Author::::PrescottBoil
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:39:05Z
Encountering many people in a chronic state of denial is common-place when perusing the Grauniad - your posts are particularly swivel-eyed, however.



Author::::Fabri
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:38:21Z
I don't know what happened. I don't point fingers at anyone MI6 or anyone else for that matter, not interested in far fetched conspiracy theories and, I repeat once again, can even accept that that the two alleged assassins are actually responsible for the killingMy whole long point was referred to Mr. Harding's reporting it. The way he describes polonium varies so much that you wonder whether he did real research on it or he just willingly ignores is own contradictions just to support his story."Back at home in Muswell Hill, Litvinenko felt mildly unwell. He threw up, just once. His vomiting spasm was due to exposure to radiation – just from being near the poison. Litvinenko thought little of this episode. He had unwittingly survived his first encounter with polonium." but not the presumed Assassin who's packed with it!Again: "It is probably the most toxic poison known to man when swallowed or inhaled – more than 100bn times more deadly than hydrogen cyanide. It had come from a Russian nuclear reactor"One would think that he swallowed an Atomic Bomb juice, judging by his report. Yet, it takes him 3 weeks to die.Now, check Wikipedia: : Cyanide poisoning"A hydrogen cyanide concentration of 300 mg/m3 in air will kill a human within 10–60 minutes.[45] A hydrogen cyanide concentration of 3500 ppm (about 3200 mg/m3) will kill a human in about 1 minute.[45]"Now, can someone explain why, if it takes hydrogen cyanide 60 minutes (or 1 only) to kill someone, how come that a "100bn times more deadly than hydrogen cyanide" substance (Quote Mr. Harding) takes 3 weeks to get the same result?



Author::::ID9793630
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:38:02Z
Well, there obviously is reasonable doubt. A balance of probabilities finding in a civil suit might stand a chance but still could go either way. But there's no direct case concluded so far in an English court.



Author::::Sparebulb
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:36:17Z
I don't know ehy people would ask to leave, given they were aware of the risks and so you'd imagine were protected from them- Po 210 is deadly but not if you are protected which they should/would have been.



Author::::Sparebulb
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:31:39Z
The Po 210 only needs to be a tiny amount and even a sheet of paper would make a barrier that made it undetectable. A Russian citizen can get a UK visa for business within 3 working days, valid for 6 months.



Author::::Tattsbridge
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:22:12Z
This cnn.com article is informative (but is it authoritative?)http://edition.cnn.com/2012/11/27/health/polonium-arafat-explainer/"with polonium-210, a dangerous dose can be a matter of micrograms: smaller than a single speck of pepper, he said."



Author::::Tattsbridge
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:11:40Z
Am I being naive to ask why the account of the scared scientists is not available to us? Is there a publically available account of the investigation where you'd have expected these questions to have been asked? Perhaps it is shrouded in mystery as the official secrets act will have been applied.Can some Jo-public super sleuth help with this contextual question?



Author::::Bowiebros
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:11:28Z
'Clueless assassins'? Oh yeah, they've been identified and caught, have they?



Author::::thetablenz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:09:47Z
I believe the facts recall plod started chasing the radiation while Litvinenko was dying or shortly thereafter, and radiation contamination - as we know from grade school - tends to hang around for a fair old while.



Author::::Mo Riddiford
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:07:52Z
Nice attempt at deflection, Money Circus.This article makes no explicit reference to any 'clear and present danger'. Sadly the 'Dodgy Dossier' makes your attempt more believable for some.Not me.



Author::::ID9793630
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:06:19Z
You're quite correct, that the depleted uranium thing is even reported on and not hushed up as a secret, but then very quickly glossed over and more or less ignored. Several hundred thousand people exposed and suffering the effects and generations to come of foetal abnormalities count for nothing much, but this one case of dishonour amongst a bunch of spooks will run and run.



Author::::Vladimir Makarenko
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:03:08Z
was autopsy results ever officially released? Britain refused to give Russians access to protocols of the autopsy. Which is another point which somehow left in a dark corner.



Author::::PeregrineSlim
DateTime::::2016-03-07T05:02:45Z
The obvious answer is that there is a campaign of epic proportions going on to anathematise Russia.



Author::::MasMaz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:57:40Z
Ok. But do Russian gangsters radiate people? Do they even poison people? I thought they just took them out. Very interesting world event. I still lean towards Putin with possibly MI6 looking the other way. At this time Putin had not consolidated power. Litvinenko still had influence and he was certainly still operating in Russia which may have been a problem that needed dealing with. The truth is I only care bc it's fascinating. These are all bad people.



Author::::annamarinja
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:57:37Z
It seems that jezzam wants to lecture on some moral superiority of the US/UK deciders. If only: http://www.countercurrents.org/dicekns230710.htm



Author::::annamarinja
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:54:55Z
A little bit wayward, but how come that the MSM' indignation over alleged radioactive poisoning of one man, is nowhere to find when the name "Fallujah" enters a conversation. The US/UK coalition of the willing has intentionally poisoned the large civilian area with depleted uranium, which led to the death and suffering of the multitude of human beings, including newborns with the horrific congenital deformities. http://www.countercurrents.org/dicekns230710.htm



Author::::raffine
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:51:40Z
Mr Stalin used an ice-pick to off Trotsky. Mr Putin uses polonium to silence his opponents.



Author::::Vladimir Makarenko
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:49:49Z
"the Russian state for several millenia",This is why Russians are superior to their Western opponents on world history topics... you sure you can distinguish Russia from Ancient Egypt?What else you know about Russia?



Author::::raffine
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:48:56Z
Indeed. No need to get work up over murder by polonium.



Author::::MoneyCircus
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:47:28Z
It's Blair-grade imaginings, this story. I'm not touching it. 



Author::::skipperjoe
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:44:39Z
It makes for a good anti-Putin story but frankly I find it too absurd to be true. Litvinenko was a minor pain in the backside and given his CV knew the risks of antagonising Putin from London. What happened, happened but his death is hardly something for the UK to get worked up over.



Author::::Vladimir Makarenko
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:43:46Z
I do not say that the British government is directly involved. What I suspect that his MI6 handlers didn't pay much attention to his extra curriculum activities which got him killed intentionally or by accident if it was smuggling. If the myth about political assassination is dropped then all what is left that MI6 dealt with a dirty guy whose activities resulted in radioactive contamination of London. Giving the story political spin by one stone British government is going after Putin and posture itself as defender of "a dissident" not a gangster.



Author::::ID9793630
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:42:37Z
I doubt whether the planners are all that clueless or incompetent. The executers may not have been fully briefed in all aspects of the operation but this would have been thought through and deliberate as well. It is as if they have erected an enormous billboard saying: "Look what we can do."



Author::::MasMaz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:34:18Z
Response to someone earlier.



Author::::Giftedbutlazee
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:32:07Z
Why did my remark about the Bulgarian assassination of Georgi Markov in London seem worthy of censure? 



Author::::icelandicmaiden
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:31:58Z
So let me get this straight - Two known Russian spies enter the UK armed with the most lethal substance known to man, except that they were personally unaware of its lethality. They travel all over London, and meet a Russian man who had recently become a spy for the West, and at a number of meetings attempt to poison his tea. They spread this material all over London with apparent impunity and with no health effects, then return to Russia to replenish their supply for a second meeting with the Russian traitor, again undetected or under no suspicion from UK authorities. Some years later Plod plots their path through London, where significant amounts of the deadly substance still reside, but the assassins remain unaffected, as apparently are the good people of London. All of this beggars belief, and only the most simple of minds would accept the proposition put in the article.



Author::::MasMaz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:31:48Z
I agreed with point about nervous scientists.



Author::::ID9793630
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:31:44Z
This whole polonium poisoning thing is certainly intriguing as it would seem there was never any intention for the act to remain undetected: 



Author::::raffine
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:29:53Z
It's elementary.



Author::::MoneyCircus
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:29:52Z
That's useful background on poisoning but it doesn't account for all the other improbables in this case.



Author::::MasMaz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:29:09Z
True that.



Author::::Fabri
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:28:46Z
Why even waste your energy with Jezzam?He's happy in his little microcosm where they tell him that everything is Russia's fault and he believes that. He sees Russia from his backyard, just like Sarah Palin. The Red Army is coming, people like him still use the word KGB....



Author::::raffine
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:28:30Z
Mr Putin's victim.



Author::::MasMaz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:28:11Z
I agree with that and I was wrong you made that significant point. I can accept that Litvinenko may have gotten sick by only sipping or smelling the original tea. But why the scientists would request to be removed is strange. It's either a substance that needs to ingested or not. I agree it's strange but maybe it just a 3rd hand account, maybe the scientists really said something like 'the reading is off the charts! We don't know what's in this room and we need to be cautious'.



Author::::gopsu71781
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:21:07Z
I remember that story. It was crazy.



Author::::lavrovsdog
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:20:35Z
I dunno. I think a Daffy Duck cartoon bomb picture held up in congress is pretty much the limit of stupidity.



Author::::DogsLivesMatter
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:20:12Z
Hmm, well I guess if your life work is with MI6 or FSB you take your chances. Live by the sword die by the sword and all that.



Author::::MasMaz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:18:55Z
Clearly Putin is the prime suspect especially back then before he consolidated his power as now. Your proposition about a small sip is reasonable. But why would the scientists in hotel room ask to leave? And why the scare tactics regarding the splashing and exposure of the stuff throughout the article?



Author::::PeregrineSlim
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:17:50Z
Litvinenko was connected to the Russian secret services before getting paid by MI6 and moreover the ones who first argued for Putin involvement were none other than those associated with the oligarch Berezovsky.



Author::::MasMaz
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:14:55Z
This is a fair point. Along with the scientists asking to be removed from the hotel. Either this element/isotope whatever needs to be ingested as many including the article states or it can be breathed or absorbed throughly the skin. Maybe it's both but nobody has offered that proposition.



Author::::Fabri
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:13:09Z
OH BOY.....OK, The point in my comment is: OK LET'S ASSUME THAT THE 2 GUYS ACTUALLY DID IT (so I'm not denying it or defending them, I'm even ready to accept that they may be the killers, but......BUT....)"The article and lots of posters have stated that PO-210 needs to be ingested. Why be nervous?"are you actually saying that a few self stated experts and Mr. Harding himself are more competent than 2 scientists?If your doctor tells you that smelling bleach for 24 hours in a row is dangerous but then mr. self stated Facebook style expert says that it's no big deal, who do you believe?and everything else, the contradictions: "they didn't know what they were carrying" than it turns out that they do, doesn't that at least show at least some contradictions? aside from the other points?



Author::::Dave1London
DateTime::::2016-03-07T04:08:10Z
Or rather, no identifiable individual died.



